ROSDiscover: Statically Detecting Run-Time
Architecture Misconfigurations in Robotics Systems

Christopher S. Timperley, Tobias D¨urschmid, Bradley Schmerl, David Garlan, and Claire Le Goues
Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, PA, USA
{ctimperl, tdurschm, schmerl, garlan, clegoues}@cs.cmu.edu

Abstract—Robot systems are growing in importance and
complexity. Ecosystems for robot software, such as the Robot
Operating System (ROS), provide libraries of reusable software
components that can be configured and composed into larger
systems. To support compositionality, ROS uses late binding and
architecture configuration via “launch files” that describe how
to initialize the components in a system. However, late binding
often leads to systems failing silently due to misconfiguration, for
example by misrouting or dropping messages entirely.

In this paper we present ROSDiscover, which statically
recovers the run-time architecture of ROS systems to find such
architecture misconfiguration bugs. First, ROSDiscover con-
structs component level architectural models (ports, parameters)
from source code. Second, architecture configuration files are an-
alyzed to compose the system from these component models and
derive the connections in the system. Finally, the reconstructed
architecture is checked against architectural rules described in
first-order logic to identify potential misconfigurations.

We present an evaluation of ROSDiscover on real world, off-
the-shelf robotic systems, measuring the accuracy, effectiveness,
and practicality of our approach. To that end, we collected the
first data set of architecture configuration bugs in ROS from
popular open-source systems and measure how effective our
approach is for detecting configuration bugs in that set.

Index Terms—ROS, Software Architecture, Static Analysis

I. INTRODUCTION

Ensuring that robotics systems are free from defects is a
pressing research challenge. Robots are ubiquitous, with appli-
cations ranging from warehouses and autonomous delivery to
manufacturing vehicles and driving them. Since robots often
interact with humans during their tasks, defects in robotics
systems can cause significant safety hazards.

Robot systems are often component-based systems, and can
be comprised of hundreds of different components [1], [2].
To construct a robot system, developers define and configure
component parameters and connect components so that they
can communicate in a variety of ways, such as through topics
(publish-subscribe), service calls (synchronous call-return),
and actions (asynchronous call-return).

The most popular open-source framework for component-
based robotics systems, the Robot Operating System (ROS),
uses late binding mechanisms for dynamic composition of
components. To increase the reusability of the more than
6 0001 software packages in the ROS ecosystem, ROS uses

This work has been supported in part by NASA (Award 80NSSC20K1720),

AFRL (Award 19-PAF00747), and the NSF (Award CCF-1750116)
1https://index.ros.org/stats/ [Date Accessed: 4th November 2021]

configuration mechanisms and connectors that are not bound
during compile time [3]. These mechanisms include string-
based identifiers for topics, services, actions, and parameters,
as well as remappings between these identifiers [4].

While useful, the use of late binding for component compo-
sition is prone to misconfiguration of component connections,
such as mismatching names or types. This can result in mes-
sages being misrouted or dropped, configuration parameters
being silently ignored, or unexpected exceptions [5]. Such
bugs can be hard to find since they only manifest at run time.
Our key insight into identifying these bugs is that many of
them manifest as errors in the run-time architecture. That is,
they result from inconsistent composition or configuration of
components and connectors. We call this class of bugs archi-
tecture misconfiguration bugs. Run-time architectural models
contain components (incl. typed parameters and ports), and
connectors. Given a set of architectural well-formedness rules,
architectural checking could in principal identify many of
these bugs [6]. However, ROS run-time architectures are not
specified in one place. Instead, they are typically implicitly
defined by widely scattered pieces of source code and config-
uration files, rather than via formal architectural models [7].
This motivates the use of automatic techniques to reconstruct
run-time architectures to support automatic analysis and iden-
tification of architecture misconfiguration bugs.

General techniques to reconstruct arbitrary run-time archi-
tectures from source code are not accurate enough to reliably
capture component connections and configurations, especially
for publish-subscribe [8], [9]. Run-time architectures can
differ significantly from the source code structure, and the
variety of implementations makes it hard to infer connectors
absent domain-specific assumptions. This limits the accuracy
(i.e., the precision and recall of recovered elements) of generic
static reconstruction approaches. Existing ROS-specific tech-
niques [10]–[12] have achieved higher accuracy by exploiting
connections between ROS Application Programming Interface
(API) calls to connector usage. These prior approaches are
still inadequately accurate for reliable automatic identification
of misconfigurations, because they do not leverage sufficient
source level information. However, their initial success sup-
ports our intuition that such domain-specific knowledge is
critical to effective architectural recovery.

In this paper, we present ROSDiscover, an approach for
statically recovering run-time ROS architectures from source
code and configuration files to identify architectural miscon-

figuration bugs. First, ROSDiscover constructs component
models (typed ports and parameters) via static analysis that
focuses on a small set of calls to the ROS API. Second,
architecture configuration files are analyzed to compose the
system from these component models and derive the connec-
tions in the system. Finally, the reconstructed architecture is
checked against architectural rules described in predicate logic
to identify potential misconfigurations that could cause defects.
Our approach is effective, accurate, and scalable, exploit-
ing several key observations about component-based robotics
sytems in general and ROS systems in particular:

1) Component architectures are defined via API calls that

have well-understood architectural semantics [4].

2) The composition and configuration of components to
build larger systems is done in separate architecture
configuration files (i.e., launch files). Most of these result
in “quasi-static” systems. That is, architectures rarely
change following run-time initialization [4].

3) ROS systems rely on a small de facto core library of
components [13]. We provide a small number of hand-
written models for components from this library that are
too complex or dynamic to be statically recovered.

Overall, we make the following contributions:
• An approach to statically recover run-time architectures
in ROS systems based on symbolic execution of API calls
and static analysis of configuration files;

• An approach to use first-order logic to find architecture

misconfiguration bugs in recovered architectures;

• ROSDiscover, an open-source implementation of our

approach: https://github.com/rosqual/rosdiscover;

• The first available data set of 29 architecture misconfig-

uration bugs across 5 open-source ROS system;

• An evaluation on popular real-world open source ROS
systems and the bugs from our newly collected data set.
Our theoretical approach is generalizable to other ecosystems
for which above mentioned observations hold true, such as
flight systems [14] or microservice architectures [15]. The
corresponding artifact containing ROSDiscover, our data
set, Docker images, analysis scripts, and results can be found
here: https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.5834633.

names and values) that stores configuration parameters. Nodes
use the parameter server to configure themselves dynamically.
In our context, a component parameter is a value passed in
on component launch that can customize its behavior. For our
purposes, the most interesting uses of parameters focus on
configuring topic or service names, since those are relevant to
architectural interactions between nodes.

ROS nodes interact with each other through a set of ROS-
standard communication styles: topics, services, and actions.
Topics implement a publish-subscribe style providing asyn-
chronous message-based, multi-endpoint communication be-
tween nodes. Nodes subscribe to topics using the string-
representation of their name and name space. Then they
receive any data published to the subscribed topics. There
can be multiple publishers and subscribers for a topic. Topics
are the main form of communication between nodes in ROS,
and are used for periodic information (e.g., sensor data or
positions) or sporadic requests, such as turning off a motor.

Services implement a synchronous call-return style of com-
munication between nodes. Nodes attempting to call a service
look up the service provider in a registry based on the string-
based name of the service. Because in ROS 1 they are
synchronous, services are intended for short queries, such as
the state of a node or short mathematical computation.

Actions implement an asynchronous call-return style for
long-lived requests to be performed by another node. Nodes
submit goals to other nodes (such as navigating to a particular
location), and can register callbacks to keep apprised of
feedback, and results. In ROS 1, actions are implemented as
a library that uses the other two communication mechanisms.
To initialize and configure a ROS system, ROS 1 allows
developers to specify launch files – Extensible Markup Lan-
guage (XML) files that specify which nodes to start, node
parameters, and topic name remaps when composing nodes.
Launch files often include other launch files and can contain
conditional logic. Note that launch files do not directly connect
nodes with each other, since this is done using ports defined
within components.

The configuration of nodes and their connections can be
observed during run time by traversing the ROS graph, a tool
to query the current run-time architecture of a running system.

II. ARCHITECTURE MISCONFIGURATION BUGS IN ROS

B. Architecture Misconfiguration Bugs

We begin by defining architectural misconfiguration bugs

and describe how they relate to the ROS framework.

A. Background on ROS

From a software perspective, a ROS-based system is com-
posed of components called nodes, which are processes that
perform computation.2 ROS 13 provides a ROS Master, a cen-
tralized hub that provides naming and registration for all nodes
in a ROS system and parameter server (a shared dictionary of

2See https://wiki.ros.org/Nodes. Nodelets are specialized nodes that can be
loaded to share memory; we include them under the umbrella term “Node”.
3We focus on ROS 1 because doing so gives us access to significantly more

systems and historical defects (ROS 2 was released in 2020)

We call bugs that result from an inconsistent composition
of software components architecture misconfiguration bugs. In
this context, composition refers to the parameterization or con-
figuration of components or connectors. Such a composition
can be inconsistent in the following ways:

• A connector fails to connect ports it
connect (e.g., a topic name mismatch).

is supposed to

• A connector connects ports of inconsistent types (e.g.,
message type mismatch between what the publisher sends
versus what the subscriber receives).

• A mandatory component parameter has not been set.
• A component parameter has been set to an instance of an

incompatible type.

System

Commits

Contributors

Releases

Bugs in Data Set

AutoRally
Autoware
MAVROS
Husky
TurtleBot

615
3570
2503
511
1142

21
74
99
24
29

11
16
40
46
92

8
12
1
6
2

TABLE I: Statistics on the systems contained in our bug data set.

Selection Criteria: We collected documented bugs on
GitHub from repositories discussed in Malavolta et al. [19]
(as these repositories are well-studied and mature). For each
repository, we searched for the key words “topic bug”, “topic
fix”, “subscribe bug”, “subscribe fix”, “publish bug”, “publish
fix”, “topic rename”, “launch file fix”, and “launch file bug”
in commits, issues, and pull requests. Not all of the results
refer to run-time architecture misconfigurations, and so we
manually verified/filtered the bugs by inspecting the code,
change history, and documentation. We excluded bugs for
which we were unable to compile the software versions. As
shown in Table I, the data set contains 29 bugs across 5
systems. Note that this is not intended to be a complete list
of architecture misconfiguration bugs in those systems.

Collected Data: For bugs caused by a broken publish-
subscribe connector (i.e., inconsistent topic names or message
types), we identified the publisher, topic, subscriber, and a set
of launch files that launch the corresponding nodes. For bugs
caused by a wrong configuration (i.e., inconsistent parameter
names or parameter types), we identified the launch files and
the misconfigured nodes. To formally define the misconfigu-
ration types, we also list a corresponding architectural well-
formedness rule violated by the bug. To enable users of our
data set to verify their testing environment, each bug consists
of a bug-commit at which the bug is present, and a bug-fix
commit. Docker images for each bug containing the source
code, all its dependencies, and the compiled executables for
analysis can be found in the artifact.

Building Historic Project Versions: Some of the commits
related to the bugs are many years old and were built with
much older versions of their dependencies and much older
versions of ROS (the oldest bug dates back to March 2014
and was reproduced with ROS Indigo Igloo). To support
replicability, we created Docker images for each commit, each
containing the versions of their build- and run-dependencies
(including ROS packages, CUDA API version, external li-
braries, compilers, and the ROS distribution). If the project
documented which versions of a dependencies were used, we
installed these in the Docker image. Otherwise, we installed
the time of the corresponding
the most recent version at
commit date.6 For versions for which we were unable to
construct the Docker images according to this methodology,
we forward-ported the bugs (i.e., applied the bug-introducing
change to a version of the software that we can build).

Fig. 1: Component-connector views of a publish-subscribe connector
in Autoware.AI before (top) and after (bottom) a bug was introduced.
Renaming the topic line_class to line only in the publisher
disconnected publishers and subscribers accidentally. The publishers
and subscribers are dangling.

incident

Architecture misconfiguration bugs often arise due to mis-
spellings or when large systems evolve inconsistently, as
in October 2021
Facebook’s multi-million-dollar
shows [16]. For example, while developers change names or
types of parameters and topics in one part of the system, they
might forget to change them in other parts of the system. To
illustrate, consider Figure 1, illustrating a bug in Autoware.AI,
the most popular open-source framework for self-driving
vehicles. The system contains the vector_map_loader
node, which publishes the line_class, point_class,
area_class, pole_class, and box_class topics. The
nodes feat_proj, lane_rule, and velocity_set sub-
scribe to some of these topics, as shown at the top of the figure.
In one commit, the developers updated the topic names to
drop the “_class” suffixes.4 However, they forgot to change
these topic names in the feat_proj, lane_rule, and
velocity_set nodes, as illustrated in the bottom of the
figure; they therefore did not receive any data. It took the
developers two months to find and fix the bug.5

In general, to check whether a given version of the archi-
tecture has misconfiguration bugs, one needs to know which
components are in the systems and how they are connected.
A simple string search for API calls and their arguments is
usually not sufficient for this, because many arguments do not
get passed to the APIs inline or as literals and the context of
the API call is relevant to determine the name space [4].

Hence, we propose a static analysis approach to find bugs
like these, overcoming the limitations and expense of testing
complex robotics systems [17], [18]. Integrated into a continu-
ous integration pipeline, our tool could tell the developers that
their architecture is inconsistent when pushing a new commit.

C. A Data Set of Architecture Misconfiguration Bugs in ROS

To illustrate the variety of architecture misconfiguration
bugs and to foster more research on them, we construct and
provide a data set of bugs from real-world open-source ROS
systems. The data set can be found in the artifact.

4https://github.com/Autoware-AI/autoware.ai/commit/fc8f69
5https://github.com/Autoware-AI/autoware.ai/commit/c2a090

6Using https://github.com/rosin-project/rosinstall generator time machine

Legendvector_map_loaderlane rulePublish portNodeTopicfeat projvelocity setSubscribe port____/line classsubscribepublishlane rulefeat projvelocity set__/line classvector_map_loader/line_subscribepublishFig. 2: Overview of the analysis stages (dark rectangles), data (rectangles), and data flow (arrows) of ROSDiscover. First, the component
interface models are inferred from source code. Then, these models are composed according to architectural configuration files. Finally the
architecture is checked against well-formedness rules specified in first-order logic.

III. ROSDISCOVER

A common approach to detect bugs that manifest in the run-
time architecture, is to check well-formdness rules on run-time
architectural models. This section describes the theoretical
foundation of static recovery of run-time architectures of ROS
systems to find architecture misconfiguration bugs.

Our architectural recovery must reconstruct the structural
connections between components, as well as component pa-
rameters. In architectural terms, structural connections corre-
spond to the ports and the connectors between them. Mean-
while, component parameters control (among other things) the
naming of component interfaces, such as topics or services.
Beyond being undecidable in general, effective static recovery
of run-time architectures is difficult. First, a system’s run-
time view can differ from the more accessible module view.
Moreover, architectural connectors and ports can be imple-
mented in a variety of ways, precluding a domain-independent
approach to identifying and modeling them. We overcome
these challenges for ROS by relying on three key observations:

1) Well-defined Component Framework API: ROS run-
time architectures are defined via a small set of API
calls that have simple and well-understood architectural
semantics [4]. Static analysis for component port recov-
ery can focus on a small space of ROS API calls.
2) Quasi-static Architectures: ROS uses separate archi-
tecture configuration files (launch files) to compose com-
ponents into larger systems. The resulting systems are
typically “quasi-static” [4], rarely changing after initial-
ization. Architectural recovery can thus focus on parsing
launch files rather than considering more complicated
behavioral change. For (rare) dynamic architectures, the
output contains elements than are not in the ground truth.
3) Small Core Library: ROS systems heavily rely on a
small de facto core library of packages, most from the
core library [13]. Core packages can be more difficult
to analyze statically because they often include complex
control flows and extension mechanisms to support gen-

erality. We support complex systems by providing a way
to specify reusable handwritten models for components
that are difficult to analyze statically.

Figure 2 provides an overview of the analysis process and

its inputs. The analysis consists of three parts:

1) The Component Model Recovery stage recovers a com-
ponent’s interface and internal behavior based on the
component’s source code (Section III-A).

2) The System Architecture Composition stage creates a
component-port-connector model of an entire system
configuration using the models from the previous stage
and the architecture configuration files (Section III-B).
3) The Bug Detection stage finds architecture misconfigu-
ration bugs by checking well-formedness rules specified
in first-order logic on the system model (Section III-C).
In this paper we focus on the recovery of topic, service,
and action ports for components and bugs that results from a
misconfiguration of their corresponding connectors. To reduce
implementation effort, we limit the analysis to C++ rather than
Python because C++ is the most used language in ROS [4].
Static analysis of this kind in Python is possible and part of
our future engineering effort. The inputs to ROSDiscover
consist of ROS launch files, CMake files, package descriptions,
and C++ source code files corresponding to a given system.

A. Component Model Recovery

The Component Model Recovery stage creates a symbolic
description of the interface of each individual component from
node source code. Each description, or component model,
specifies the ports (i.e., publish, subscribe, service calls, and
provided services) and parameters of its associated component.
This information is represented as a set of symbolic function
summaries. Each summary describes the architectural effects
of an associated function in terms of its arguments, represented
symbolically, as described below.

To find all calls to architecturally-relevant APIs in a com-
ponent, we use standard static analysis. ROSDiscover iden-
tifies the source files in a component by analyzing associated

Launch Files<launch><include file="$(find package)/node.launch"/><argname="max_speed" default="30" /><nodepkg="driving_planner"name="velocity_set" type="velocity_set"><remapfrom="/drive_vel" to="/vel"/><paramname="speed" value="$(argmax_speed)"/></node></launch>Launch Files<launch><include file="$(find package)/node.launch"/><argname="max_speed" default="30" /><nodepkg="driving_planner"name="velocity_set" type="velocity_set"><remapfrom="/drive_vel" to="/vel"/><paramname="speed" value="$(argmax_speed)"/></node></launch>Rulesrule topicsMatchAdvertiser= invariantforallr :! ROSTopicAdvertiserRoleTinself.ROLES| forallp :! TopicAdvertisePortTin r.ATTACHEDPORTS| (p.topic== topic ANDcompatibleTopics(p.msg_type,msg_type));Rulesrule topicsMatchAdvertiser= invariantforallr :! ROSTopicAdvertiserRoleTinself.ROLES| forallp :! TopicAdvertisePortTin r.ATTACHEDPORTS| (p.topic== topic ANDcompatibleTopics(p.msg_type,msg_type));System Architecture CompositionComponent Model RecoveryBug Detection via Rule CheckingC++ Code of Noderos::Subscriber sub_line= nh.subscribe("vector_map_info/line_class", […]);ros::Publisher pub = n.advertise<[…]>("vector_map_info/line", […]);line_pub.publish([…]);C++ Code of Noderos::Subscriber sub_line= nh.subscribe("vector_map_info/line_class", […]);ros::Publisher pub = n.advertise<[…]>("vector_map_info/line", […]);line_pub.publish([…]);CMakeFilesadd_executable(velocity_setnodes/velocity_set/velocity_set.cpp)CMakeFilesadd_executable(velocity_setnodes/velocity_set/velocity_set.cpp)Run-Time ArchitectureRun-Time Architecturelane rulefeat projvelocity set__/line classvector_map_loader/line_Component Modelssubscribes-to"/vector_map_info/line_class"LineArraypublishes-to"/vector_map_info/line"LineArryassigns (reads-param "speed")Component Modelssubscribes-to"/vector_map_info/line_class"LineArraypublishes-to"/vector_map_info/line"LineArryassigns (reads-param "speed")PoseToTF(ros::NodeHandle nh, std::string rtopic)
{

std::string pose_topic_name;
nh.getParam("pose_topic", pose_topic_name);
nh.subscribe(pose_topic_name, 10,

&PoseToTF::callbackGetPose, this);

nh.advertise<std_msgs::Empty>(rtopic, 1);

}

func PoseToTF(nh: NodeHandle, rtopic: String) {

pose_topic_name := readParam(joinNamespace(nh,

"pose_topic"), "string");

subscriber(joinNamespace(nh, pose_topic_name),

"geometry_msgs/Pose");

call("PoseToTF::callbackGetPose");
publisher(joinNamespace(nh, rtopic)), "std_msgs/Empty");

}

(a) simplified C++ source code

(b) corresponding symbolic function summary

Fig. 3: ROSDiscover recovers component interfaces by producing and composing symbolic summaries for individual source code functions,
describing the architecturally relevant API and function calls within those functions.

CMake files and build output, and using off-the-shelf Clang
functionality to create/merge the Abstract Syntax Trees (ASTs)
for all component translation units. This AST can be traversed
to find calls to API functions defining the run-time compo-
nent interface. For publish-subscribe connectors (i.e., topics),
this includes the advertise, publish, and subscribe
API methods. For call-return connectors (i.e., services), this
includes call and advertiseService. For parameters,
this includes the param, getParam, and setParam.

However, this AST analysis is inadequate to fully describe
the component interface. Figure 3 illustrates: the code on the
left-hand side calls subscribe, an architecturally-relevant
API function. However, pose_topic_name, the topic name
passed to subscribe is defined by a parameter. The topic
name provided to the advertise API call on the following
line is given by a function argument, reset_topic. More-
over, the call is made through a node handle object, nh, which
specifies and controls the call’s namespace.

Thus,

the full component model

is composed of sum-
maries of all functions that can reach an architecturally-
relevant API call, thereby providing necessary context around
the parameters. Standard reachability analysis (supported by
Clang) identifies relevant functions (those that can reach a
relevant API call). ROSDiscover lifts each relevant API
or function call into a statement in the symbolic summary,
capturing architecturally relevant arguments to that call. Topic
names and message formats are recorded for publishers. For
function calls, only the arguments that are used in the callee’s
symbolic summary are captured. Our implementation captures
strings and node handles, but ignores other data types (e.g.,
integers, floats, vectors) as they are seldom used in API calls.
Call arguments are replaced with symbolic values computed
in relatively standard ways. String literals are converted to
literals in the summary; the effects of common ROS and
C++ operations and library functions (e.g., concatentation)
are modeled; variable references are traced to their reaching
definitions, where arguments to the function call and the results
of ROS parameter reads are represented symbolically.

Figure 3b provides an example of a recovered function
summary. The first statement models the effect of reading
a parameter, readParam(..), and storing its value to
pose_topic_name. The qualified parameter name is ob-
tained by resolving the unqualified name "pose_topic"
in its associated namespace (nh) via joinNamespace. For

example, if the namespace is /robot, then the qualified
name of the parameter accessed from the parameter server is
/robot/pose_topic.] The next statement uses the value
of the parameter to define a new subscriber via subscribe.
Finally, a call is made to an architecturally relevant function
via call, and a publisher is defined using a topic name
provided by a function argument, reset_topic.

Handwritten Models: Our symbolic execution implemen-
tation balances expressiveness with scalability and cannot
statically infer or model all behavior. For example, some ROS
systems specify custom configuration files with an application
this, among other sources of imprecision
specific format;
(like dynamically linked libraries), is out of ROSDiscover’s
present scope. ROSDiscover by default represents such in-
formation using ⊤ (“top”), an overapproximation. We support
the ability to manually refine analysis results by providing
handwritten models. If a component is reusable because it is
part of the ROS core library, associated models can be reused
as well to minimize specification overhead; we specified 15
such models as part of our evaluation. They are written in
an embedded DSL for Python filling in a data structure. On
average, each model has 28.78 lines of code, ranging from 5
to 170. The models can be found in the artifact.

B. System Architecture Composition

The System Architecture Composition stage uses the sys-
tem’s architecture configuration files to compose the inferred
component models (Section III-A) into a component-port-
connector model of the whole system. Overall, this involves
instantiating the symbolic values in the component models
by resolving them to their concrete values. To illustrate why
symbols in component models cannot be fully resolved prior to
composing them, consider topic remappings, a common prac-
tice [4]. A developer may provide code to implement a camera
processing node that subscribes to a topic called camera. A
robot may have that publish images to topics left_camera
and right_camera respectively. The resulting run-time
architectural model should contain two instances of the camera
processing node, for each set of images. The launch file will
remap the camera topic of the first camera instance to
subscribe to the left_camera, and the second instance
to right_camera. The one component can therefore be
configured multiple ways at run time.

The composition stage thus recursively parses the system
launch files to determine (a) which nodes are run/loaded,
(b) how they are parameterized, and (c) how topics are
remapped at run time. We use the information from the node
tag in the launch files to identify the names and types of
launched/loaded nodes. Launch files also describe parameters
used to configure components and topics. Publish-subscribe
connectors are reconstructed based on the topic names from
component models. In ROS, topic names are unique. Hence,
for each publisher and subscriber that refer to a topic with
the same name, we create a publish-subscribe connector. Call-
return connectors are reconstructed based on the service calls
from the component models, each of which creates a call-
return connector. The caller role is set
to the component
instance initiating the call. The service provider role is set
to the component instance that provides this service (a service
can only have one provider in ROS).

C. Bug Detection via Rule Checking

The Bug Detection stage takes the component-connector
model of the system architecture as an input and checks a
set of rules described in first-order logic. Each component-
connector system model is a typed directed graph that connects
component instances via connectors. A typical approach in
architectural checking describes predicates on those graphs
and defines assertions on those predicates describing the
architectural design intent [6], [20], [21].

We use Acme [22] to check the rules and report all rule
violations. We developed a ROS Acme style, which can be
found in the ROSFam.acme in the artifact, to describe a well-
formed ROS architecture. These have on average 2.6 lines of
code and are general to all of ROS, and so need to be defined
only once. It is possible for domain experts to define additional
rules for classes of robot system or at the system level, but
this has not been explored in this paper.

The main challenge of bug detection is to define rules that
find useful errors while minimizing false positives [23], [24].
To strike a balance, we picked these ROS style rules for
detecting misconfigured topics in ROSDiscover:

1) There should not be connectors that connect ports of

different message types (rule shown in Figure 2).

2) There should not be a dangling subscriber/publisher (i.e.,
a subscriber without publisher or vice versa) if there is
a publisher/subscriber that has the similar type and a
similar topic name.

3) There should not be a dangling publisher if there is a

dangling subscriber that has a similar type.

4) There should not be a dangling subscriber if there is a

publisher of a similar type.

To identify similar names or types we measure the edit
distance between identifiers. We use a variation of Dam-
erau–Levenshtein distance [25], [26] that considers that de-
velopers often use underscores in identifiers, and topic names
use slashes to denote name spaces. We adjust the cost of
insertion and substitution to be the distance metric between
the segments split by “/” and “_”.

D. Implementation

ROSDiscover works on containerized versions of robotics
systems, simplifying extensibility and replicability. A layer
called ROSWire manipulates ROS-specific files and processes
on ROS Docker containers. We provide basic scaffolding for
the static analysis (e.g., reachability). The system is written
in Python, comprising about 15 000 lines of code. In terms of
performance, node recovery is the most expensive operation
because it must do static analysis, taking 47 sec per node
on average. However, this only needs to be done once per
component. Component models are modeled using Acme [22].
Once recovered, constructing and checking that model takes
about two minutes.

IV. EVALUATION
We designed ROSDiscover to trade off between false pos-
itives, false negatives, and efficiency, with a goal of being prac-
tical for typical ROS systems. To evaluate ROSDiscover, we
address the following research questions:

• RQ1: How accurately does ROSDiscover statically
recover the interface of ROS nodes? This question ad-
dresses the accuracy of Component Model Recovery.
• RQ2: How accurately does ROSDiscover statically
recover run-time architectures of real ROS systems? This
question addresses the accuracy of the System Architec-
ture Composition.

• RQ3: How effectively does ROSDiscover find configu-
ration bugs in real ROS systems? This question evaluates
the practical use of our architectural recovery approach
as applied to finding architecture misconfiguration bugs
by measuring false positives and false negatives.

Data sets: RQ1 and RQ2 require a set of stable ROS
systems, while RQ3 requires a set of known buggy versions
of ROS systems. We evaluate RQ3 using the bug data set
presented in Section II-C. For RQs 1 and 2, we collected a
set of systems intended to be representative and realistic. Our
selection criteria were:

• Programming Language: We selected ROS systems
primarily comprised of C++ code. For systems with a few
Python components we manually created the models.
• Availability of a Simulator: Our methodology for RQ2
requires that we can execute the system in simulation.
• Popularity: We focused on systems that were highly
starred on GitHub as representative of the target audience
for ROSDiscover.

System

Stars

Lines of XML

Lines of Code

Bugs for RQ3

AutoRally
Autoware
Fetch
Husky
TurtleBot

638
4985
126
264
239

43 455
30 771
149 664
54 699
1 237 887

190 340
250 509
434 022
876 405
1 596 546

5
8
0
5
1

TABLE II: Systems used for evaluation with their stars on GitHub
(as of 8th November 2021), lines of XML configuration files, lines
of code including their dependent ROS packages, and the number of
bugs selected for RQ3.

We used the data set from Malavolta et al. [19] as a basis
for the system selection. The resulting systems are: Au-
toRally [27], Autoware [28], Fetch [29], Husky, and Turtle-
Bot [30]. Table II provides an overview indicating lines of
code for each system, and the number of misconfiguration
bugs we considered for RQ3.

System

AutoRally
Autoware
Fetch
Husky
TurtleBot

75
882
103
223
130

All

1306

API
Calls

% of Unknown
API Calls

Nodes

% of Nodes with
Unknown API Calls

13.33
14.51
1.94
2.69
14.62

12.63

25
209
93
105
104

507

16.00
32.06
1.08
2.86
1.92

15.19

A. RQ1 – Component Model Recovery

Methodology:

As described in Section III-A, com-
ponent
interfaces cannot always be fully recovered by
ROSDiscover. Thus, to measure the accuracy of the com-
ponent model recovery we measure the percentage of API
calls that have at least one unknown argument (i.e., where
the analysis returns ⊤). This metric is can over-approximate
the accuracy by failing to distinguish dynamically loaded
source code that cannot be analyzed statically. Nodes with
unrecoverable API calls typically require handwritten models
for the recovered architecture to be sufficiently accurate.
Because understanding and modeling a node is not always
proprotional to the number of API calls they include, we also
measured the percentage of nodes with at least one “unknown”
call as an additional heuristic for modeling effort. We evaluate
these metrics on the five systems shown in Table II.

Results: Overall, ROSDiscover can recover all infor-
mation for 87.37 % of the API calls across the systems we
analyzed, as summarized in Table III. Most of the nodes within
these systems can be fully recovered. Only 15.19 % of the
nodes contain API calls with unknown arguments, requiring
(partially) handwritten models for these nodes.

Listing 1 shows an example of an API call that our approach
cannot recover because of the limitations of our symbolic
execution. A for-loop iterates over a member variable that
changes during execution; the body of the loop contains a
subscribe call. The topic name to which the node subscribes
depends on the content of the variable. Cases like this are rare
in ROS system [4]. To further reduce the specification effort,
ROSDiscover can provide partial models (i.e., component
models containing ⊤ among recovered information), indicat-
ing where in the source it failed to recover all information.

Finally, we note that these numbers exclude 29 nodes for
which the static analysis crashed. The crashes were caused by
Clang incompatibility issues and interface problems between
CUDA and Clang. However, these are only a limitation of the
implementation, not the general approach.

In summary,

the Component
these results indicate that
Model Recovery has high accuracy (> 85 %) for real systems.

B. RQ2 – System Architecture Recovery

Methodology: Measuring the accuracy of static architec-
tural recovery requires a ground truth architecture to compare
to the recovered architecture. However, our systems do not
provide a reliable, up-to-date ground truth for their architecture
(motivating ROSDiscover in the first place!). We therefore
aimed to run full configurations of the robots and observe their
run time architectures. We used the same launch files used
for recovery to launch the robot systems, and then observed

TABLE III: Accuracy of static node recovery per system. Unknown
API calls are architecturally relevant ROS API calls for which the
static recovery cannot resolve all arguments. “All” describes the union
of all nodes, hence includes reused nodes only once.

for (auto& mapIt : chassisCommands_)
{

std::string topic = mapIt.first+"/chassisCommand";
ros::Subscriber sub = nh.subscribe(topic, 1,

&AutoRallyChassis::chassisCommandCallback, this);

chassisCommandSub_[mapIt.first] = sub;

}

Listing 1: Example of an API call that is too dynamic to recover
using static analysis. chassisCommands_ is the map of the most
recent command from each commander. Source: https://github.com/
AutoRally/autorally/blob/c2692f2/autorally core/src/autorally
chassis/AutoRallyChassis.cpp#L94-L100

the architecture dynamically by analyzing the directory of
launched nodes, and observing sent messages and topics.
Where appropriate we ran the robots through a mission and
made multiple observations, merging the observed architec-
tures to have a more complete picture of any changes that
occurred over the execution lifetime. We ended up being able
to observe only a subset of the systems: AutoRally, Husky,
and TurtleBot; we excluded Fetch, because nodes that were
different to the other systems examined are written in Python
(e.g., ”moveit” and ”demo” leaving not much additional code
for ROSDiscover to analyze, and Autoware, because all
Docker images provided by the developers resulted in some
nodes crashing during the execution of a typical scenario.

We use two metrics to compare the recovered architecture
with the observed architecture. Over-approximation measures
the percentage of elements (nodes, connectors) in the recov-
ered architecture that do not appear in the observed architec-
ture. This would occur if the observations did not cover the
same code that was covered by the static analysis. Under-
approximation measures the reverse – the degree to which
static recovery did not capture as much as was observed.
This is more serious than over-approximation because it would
indicate that our analysis has poor coverage of the architecture.
We did not use any graph differencing algorithms that might,
for example, take into account node or topic renames (i.e.,
nodes or connections where we recovered names incorrectly)
– in our measure, these are marked as deviations. Therefore,
our measure is a worst-case comparison that nonetheless gives
some indication of accuracy.

We use the fraction of nodes requiring handwritten models

that are in the core library as a proxy for modeling effort.

System

observed

recovered % over approx. % under approx.

C. RQ3 – Bug Detection

AutoRally
Husky
TurtleBot

All

13
19
12

44

13
17
13

43

0.00
5.26
16.67

6.82

0.00
15.79
8.33

9.09

TABLE IV: Accuracy of static recovery per system. Observed and
recovered contains publishers, subscribers, service providers, and
action servers. Our systems do not use action clients. “All” contains
all configurations, with reused nodes showing up multiple times.

Kind of Arch. El.

obs.

rec. % over approx. % under approx.

Providers
Publishers
Subscribers

8
20
16

8
20
15

0.00
10.00
6.25

0.00
10.00
12.50

TABLE V: The data from Table IV per architectural element.

Results: Table IV summarizes results. ROSDiscover
under-approximates system architectures to 9.09 %, compared
to the dynamic analysis. This means that 9.09 % of the
architectural elements (i.e., nodes, publishers, subscribers,
service providers, action clients, and action servers) that
in the recovered
are in the observed architecture are not
architecture. The overall over-approximation rate is 6.82 %.
Over-approximations come mainly from the handwritten mod-
els reporting topics that are not used at run time; under-
approximations come from plugins and linked libraries loaded
at run time that the static analysis does not reach.

ROSDiscover does not perform equally well on all archi-
tectural elements, as Table V shows. This is usually caused by
conditionally launching nodes depending on parameters that
cannot be recovered statically. Overall, ROSDiscover misses
12.5 % of the subscribe relationships, and 10 % of the publish
relationships in recovered nodes. This usually results from
the inaccuracies in the component models. For the recovered
nodes we have 100 % accuracy for service providers. The
studied systems did not have any action clients.

We wrote eight nodes by hand for each of AutoRally, Husky,
and TurtleBot. Due to node reuse, these numbers overlap. For
all systems, a total number of 15 nodes required handwritten
models. Ten of these are nodes are associated with the Gazebo
simulator, which is a complex third party library with its own
extension mechanism. Hence, they are out of scope of a static
recovery approach. Four node models are reusable because
they are part of the ROS core library. Moreover, our handwrit-
ten nodes are generally accurate (11.30 % over-approximated
and 5.02 % under-approximated across all system; Publishers
are under-approximated in 6.02 % of the cases, subscribers in
6.25 %, service providers in 3.74 %). Although we are not
active developers on the corresponding ROS packages, we
were generally able to create accurate models.

Overall, these results suggest that the System Architecture
Composition has high accuracy (90 %) while keeping the spec-
ification effort tractable with 3.67 non-reusable node models
per system and 28.78 lines of code per model on average.

Methodology: To measure ROSDiscover’s ability to
detect architecture misconfiguration bugs, we began from the
data set from Section II-C to construct a corpus of bugs. We
filtered the data set to focus on systems primarily written in
C++ and bugs that relate to topics, services, and actions, since
this is the class of architectural elements ROSDiscover was
designed to recover. For example, we discarded misconfigura-
tions of component parameters. This left 19 misconfiguration
bugs that ROSDiscover could potentially catch (Table II).
Recall from Section III-C that to reduce false positives,
we flag interfaces as potentially misconfigured only if an-
other node is trying to use that interface (i.e., the interface
cannot
just be dangling). In some of systems, we could
not find such nodes, even when it was fixed. For example,
the topic pose_estimate for gps_imu was incorrectly
remapped to as pose_estimate_new in the buggy version
of autorally-01. However, we could not find a subscriber to
pose_estimate in any configuration in the container (e.g.,
perhaps because a third party outside the system is expected
to subscribe to it). To mimic potential use of the buggy topic
in such cases, we introduced a node that subscribes to it
(pose_estimate, in our example).

To evaluate success, we ran bug detection on the buggy
system and checked that the misconfiguration in question was
reported (we also confirmed that the error disappeared in the
fixed system). To approximate false positives, we assessed the
number of errors produced by bug finding on the (otherwise
unmodified) systems evaluated in Section IV-B. We assume
these architectures to be correct and treat any reported errors
as a false positive, as a potential overapproximate measure.

Results: Table VI shows results. We detect eight bugs
outright. Further, eight bugs are detectable in principle, but
ROSDiscover failed to recover the architecture fully. Of
these, our static analysis did not work on three (autorally-02,
autorally-05, and husky-01) due to implementation limitations;
two (autoware-03, husky-03) were afflicted by complicated
control flows like those in Listing 1; and two (autoware-05,
autoware-09) appeared to be in parts of the software that were
not intended to be built. We marked three misconfiguration
bugs as undetectable by our approach because they either
involve multiple robot configurations, which we do not handle
yet (autoware-04), or the bugs involved the removal of dan-
gling interfaces that were never meant to be used (autoware-02,
autoware-10). In summary, a rule-based approach on run-time
architecture is applicable to architecture misconfiguration bugs
in our dataset, and ROSDiscover can detect 8 of 19.

Finally, we consider false positives, a key concern in
static analysis usability. Because the misconfiguration bugs
are reproduced as partial architectures, we instead counted the
number of false positives in the complete configurations from
RQ2, because these configurations should be complete. For
the AutoRally system, the rules result in eight false positives.
Husky has five, while TurtleBot has two.

Overall, the results show that ROSDiscover finds 42 %

Bug-ID

Detected

In Theory

Description

V. RELATED WORK

autoware-02
autoware-10
autorally-01 *
autoware-01
autoware-04
autoware-05
autoware-11
husky-02 *
husky-03
husky-04 *
husky-06 *
autorally-05
autorally-03 *
autorally-04 *
husky-01
turtlebot-01
autoware-03
autoware-09
autorally-02

Dangling connector
Dangling connector
Inconsistent topic names
Inconsistent topic names
Inconsistent topic names
Inconsistent topic names
Inconsistent topic names
Inconsistent topic names
Inconsistent topic names
Inconsistent topic names
Inconsistent topic names
Incorrect parameter path
Incorrect topic remapping
Incorrect topic remapping
Incorrect topic remapping
Incorrect topic remapping
Topic name typo
Topic name typo
Topic name variable ignored

TABLE VI: Overview of the architectural misconfiguration bugs
and whether ROSDiscover has detected the bug with the given
rules (“Detected”) or whether it is only detectable in theory due to
static recovery limitations (“In Theory”). A star (“*”) after the bug
name means the bug was detected using forward-porting. The bug-ids
reference the folders in /experiments/detection/subjects in our artifact.

of the bugs from our real-world data set while keeping the
absolute number of false positives per system tractable (< 10).

D. Threats to Validity

Regarding potential threats to External Validity, note that
our evaluation has only been conducted on open source
software. We attempted to include a diverse range of systems;
Autoware is by far the largest open-source ROS system.
However, the results may not generalize to proprietary systems
developed in different ways, or with less reuse.

Considering threats to Internal Validity, first, the analysis
in RQ2 focuses on a portion of each system corresponding
to the bug in question. Hence these results only measure
the accuracy for these configurations. Second, the dynamic
reconstruction of the architecture for RQ2 can only observe a
finite set of executions can be tested. Hence, we might miss
architectural elements that were not executed. To mitigate this
threat, we manually resolved disagreements between the static
and dynamic analyses. However, missing ground truth that
manifests in neither analysis still poses a threat that cannot
be easily addressed for complex systems, since real ground
truth data is unavailable.

Regarding Construct Validity, first, the evaluation of node-
level accuracy for RQ1 is limited to counting API calls
containing arguments designated ⊤; this over-approximates ac-
curacy by failing to distinguish information from dynamically
linked libraries. Note however that unknown API calls are part
of the evaluation of RQ2 that compares static to dynamically
covered architectures, which include code unknown to static
analysis. Finally, it is not possible to measure practicality
without the tool being used in a real development setting.
Our metrics were designed to approximate effort, but truly
evaluating usability requires evaluation in context.

Static Analysis & Bug Detection for Robotics: Static
analysis has been used to automatically find bugs in robot
systems before. The systems Phriky [31], Phys [32], and
Physframe [33] use type checking to find inconsistencies in
assignments based on physical units or 3D transformations in
ROS code. Thanks to accounting for inter-component dataflow
via publish-subscribe, they can also be used to identify in-
consistencies of message types. They could be combined
with ROSDiscover since ROSDiscover collects different
information and finds different kinds of bugs.

Furthermore, Swarmbug [34] finds configuration bugs in
robot systems that result from misconfigured algorithmic
parameters, causing the system to behave unexpectedly. In
contrast to the misconfiguration bugs that ROSDiscover
can find, these misconfigurations do not result from incorrect
composition or connection of components. Hence, they are not
architectural misconfiguration bugs.

Module View Recovery:

Initial approaches to statically
recover architectures relied on clustering software parts based
on modularity metrics [35]–[43]. More recent approaches for
static recovery of architectures use lexical information [44],
concerns [45], and interactive support for architects [46],
[47]. The results from these approaches can be used to show
architects the relative location of a piece of code in the module
view of the architecture [47], [48]. However, in contrast to
component-connector views, module views cannot be used
to detect architecture configuration bugs, since they do not
capture the interactions and composition of components. To
this end run-time architectures are needed.

Dynamic Recovery of Run-Time Architectures: In exist-
ing work, run-time architectures have mostly been recovered
using dynamic analysis. DiscoTect constructs state machines
from event traces to reconstruct run-time architectures [49].
Domain-specific reconstructions include Remote Procedure
Call (RPC) connectors of CORBA systems based on execution
traces [50] and reconstruction of telecommunication systems
using traffic case tracing of execution traces [51]. However,
for dynamic recovery a large number of system executions
have to be performed, which, especially for robotic systems,
is time-intensive and might require access to special hardware.
Furthermore, dynamic execution might miss cases in rarely ex-
ecuted software. In contrast, our approach uses static analysis,
which only assumes that the software can be compiled.

Static Recovery of Run-Time Architectures: The first
techniques for static connector recovery operated on abstract
syntax trees to find function calls using tree marching [8]
or data flow analysis [9]. There are domain-specific recovery
techniques for other domains, such as distributed systems [52],
However, they are not designed to recover publish-subscribe
architectures, such as ROS architectures.

In contrast, our work focuses only on ROS architectures,
which enables us to make assumptions on the definition of
components and the usage of connectors. Hence, components

can be directly mapped to ROS nodes. Connectors such as
publish-subscribe can be inferred from calls to the ROS API.
Existing static recovery of run-time architectures for ROS,
such as HAROS [10], [11] and Witte et al. [12] are the most
closely related to our work. They are limited to API calls
that include literals rather than variables. According to Santos
et al. [4] about 75 % of the topic names in API calls are
literals. Even if they find all of them, their accuracy is still
significantly below our 86.83 % API call recovery accuracy
and 90 % system-level accuracy, which we achieve through
a combination of handwritten models, variable and parameter
resolution, and remap parsing.

Architecture Validation: Architecture validation has been
used for compliance checking in many domains [6], [53], [54].
Constraint checking is a common way to validate architectural
structure [22], [55]. We build on this work to express and
check rules for well-formedness in ROS architectures.

VI. DISCUSSION

In this paper we have shown that run-time architectures for
ROS systems can be accurately recovered statically and that
they can be used to detect common misconfiguration bugs. Our
approach exploits the fact that static analysis only needs to
focus on architecturally relevant APIs calls and configuration
files to recover run-time architectures. While conducting this
research, we have made a number of observations.

Static analysis needs variable resolution and path sen-
sitivity: We provide support for variable resolution in our
static analysis, unlike other approaches [10]–[12]. On the other
hand, these approaches include path sensitivity analysis for
conditional API calls. To maximize accuracy, we believe future
work should combine these approaches. In fact, the data that
we have collected as part of this study can be used to focus
improvements to where they would provide the most benefit.
The approach can be used for complex systems: Systems
that heavily rely on dynamically linked libraries and custom
plugin mechanism are a challenge for every static analysis.
This is because during compile time it is unknown which
piece of software will be loaded. Since many ROS packages,
such as move_base or Gazebo, make heavy use of these
dynamic linking mechanism, static analysis alone is not a
viable solution for realistic systems. These components are
also some of the most reused across ROS projects. In con-
trast to existing work for ROS [10]–[12], we let developers
provide handwritten models for pieces of the system that
static analysis cannot handle. This enables the analysis of
entire ROS systems, which would be impractical otherwise.
Furthermore, since the average time to statically recover the
API calls from the source code is only 47 sec per node across
all of our studied systems, this approach does scale to more
complex systems having hundreds of thousands lines of code.
Hence, our approach makes automated architectural analysis
more practical for complex systems than existing approaches.
Future work is needed to provide more tailored methods for
developers to evolve partially handwritten component models,
to specify which plugins and libraries are loaded dynamically

to support static analysis where code is available, and to handle
component communication via parameters.

Rule selection can tailor the approach to use cases:
The accuracy of bug detection strongly depends on the rules
used for architectural checking. Different rules may be suitable
depending on the properties germane to a particular use case
or domain. For example, in a continuous integration pipeline,
rules that are optimized for minimizing false positives are more
practical to avoid disrupting the development process [23],
[24]. However before the release of a product, rules that
minimize false negatives (e.g., checking for all dangling sub-
scribers) can be used while taking more time to go through a
longer list of potential issues. Specific rule violation instances
can be whitelisted if they are identified as false positives to
avoid checking them again. Future work can identify which
specific ruleset is suited for the relevant use cases. One of the
challenges in crafting these rules is the simple fact that we
are really trying to identify those interfaces that are critical
to component functionality. If ROS provided mechanisms to
encourage developers to supply this information, perhaps in
the existing package specification, then architectural checking
could be much simplified. Machine learning over a large
corpus of ROS examples might also be able to further tailor
these rules based on common usage patterns.

The approach is generalizable: We believe that
the
approach to analyze API calls of component-based architec-
tural frameworks to statically recover run-time architectures
applies to other ecosystems in which the framework APIs have
well-defined architectural semantics, as well as configuration
files that define the run-time deployment of the systems. For
example, NASA’s component framework F ′ uses XML-based
architectural description and configuration and provides an
API for using architectural connectors similar to ROS [14].
Furthermore,
the microservice framework Kubernetes uses
Representational State Transfer (REST) APIs for letting ser-
vice components communicate with each other. Another aspect
of our approach is that it relies on a quasi-static architecture
that changes little as the program runs. We suspect that many
frameworks (e.g., Spring, Kafka) have a similar characteristic.
This opens up future work on applying this approach to other
domains, and other frameworks. A small step in this direction
would be to extend ROSDiscover to support Python, as well
as to support ROS 2, which is similar but has certain key
architectural differences as compared to ROS 1.

Architectural recovery supports reverse engineering:
While in this paper we focused on architecture recovery as
a means for detecting bugs, it can be used more generally.
For example, it can be used to get up-to-date architectural
documentation that can help developers to quickly understand
a package they are planning to reuse. Further, new developers
joining the team can use the architecture to become familiar
with the project by inspecting the interface of components and
understanding major connectors. So architectural information
can help with the broader task of understanding how to
correctly use complex frameworks. Future work is needed to
tailor architectural recovery to reverse engineering tasks.

[2]

REFERENCES
[1] A. Brooks, T. Kaupp, A. Makarenko, S. Williams, and A. Oreback,
“Towards component-based robotics,” in International Conference on
Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS ’05), IEEE, 2005, pp. 163–168,
DOI: 10.1109/IROS.2005.1545523.
J. Kramer and M. Scheutz, “Development environments for au-
tonomous mobile robots: A survey,” Autonomous Robots, vol. 22, no. 2,
pp. 101–132, 2007, DOI: 10.1007/s10514-006-9013-8.
P. Estefo, J. Simmonds, R. Robbes, and J. Fabry, “The Robot Operating
System: Package reuse and community dynamics,” Journal of Systems
and Software (JSS), vol. 151, pp. 226–242, 2019, DOI: https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.jss.2019.02.024.

[3]

[4] A. Santos, A. Cunha, N. Macedo, R. Arrais, and F. N. dos Santos,
“Mining the usage patterns of ROS primitives,” in International
Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS ’17), IEEE, 2017,
pp. 3855–3860, DOI: 10.1109/IROS.2017.8206237.

[6]

[5] C. Timperley and A. Wasowski, “188 ROS bugs later: Where do we
go from here?” In ROSCon Macau 2019, Open Robotics, Oct. 2019,
DOI: 10.36288/ROSCon2019-900898.
J. Knodel and D. Popescu, “A Comparison of Static Architecture Com-
pliance Checking Approaches,” in Working Conference on Software
Architecture (WICSA ’07), IEEE, 2007, pp. 12–12, DOI: 10 . 1109 /
WICSA.2007.1.
I. Malavolta, G. A. Lewis, B. Schmerl, P. Lago, and D. Garlan, “Mining
guidelines for architecting robotics software,” Journal of Systems and
Software (JSS), vol. 178, p. 110 969, 2021, DOI: https://doi.org/10.
1016/j.jss.2021.110969.

[7]

[8] D. Harris, H. Reubenstein, and A. Yeh, “Recognizers for extracting
architectural features from source code,” in Working Conference on
Reverse Engineering (WCRE ’95), IEEE, 1995, pp. 252–261, DOI: 10.
1109/WCRE.1995.514713.

[9] R. Fiutem, P. Tonella, G. Anteniol, and E. Merlo, “A cliche-based
environment to support architectural reverse engineering,” in Work-
ing Conference on Reverse Engineering (WCRE ’96), IEEE, 1996,
pp. 277–286, DOI: 10.1109/WCRE.1996.558936.

[10] A. Santos, A. Cunha, N. Macedo, and C. Lourenc¸o, “A framework for
quality assessment of ros repositories,” in International Conference on
Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS ’16), IEEE, 2016, pp. 4491–
4496, DOI: 10.1109/IROS.2016.7759661.

[12]

[11] A. Santos, A. Cunha, and N. Macedo, “Static-Time Extraction and
Analysis of the ROS Computation Graph,” in International Conference
on Robotic Computing (IRC ’19), IEEE, 2019, pp. 62–69, DOI: 10.
1109/IRC.2019.00018.
T. Witte and M. Tichy, “Checking Consistency of Robot Software
Architectures in ROS,” in International Workshop on Robotics Software
Engineering (RoSE ’18), IEEE, 2018, pp. 1–8, [Online]. Available:
https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/8445812.
S. Kolak, A. Afzal, C. Le Goues, M. Hilton, and C. S. Timperley, “It
Takes a Village to Build a Robot: An Empirical Study of The ROS
Ecosystem,” in International Conference on Software Maintenance and
Evolution (ICSME ’20), IEEE, 2020, pp. 430–440, DOI: 10 . 1109 /
ICSME46990.2020.00048.

[13]

[14] R. Bocchino, T. Canham, G. Watney, L. Reder, and J. Levison, “F
Prime: An Open-Source Framework for Small-Scale Flight Software
Systems,” in Small Satellite Conference, 2018, [Online]. Available:
https://digitalcommons.usu.edu/smallsat/2018/all2018/328/.

[15] N. Alshuqayran, N. Ali, and R. Evans, “Towards Micro Service Ar-
chitecture Recovery: An Empirical Study,” in International Conference
on Software Architecture (ICSA ’18), IEEE, 2018, pp. 47–4709, DOI:
10.1109/ICSA.2018.00014.

[16] Update about the october 4th outage, Accessed 11-Oct-2021, [Online].
Available: https://engineering.fb.com/2021/10/04/networking- traffic/
outage/.

[17] A. Afzal, C. Le Goues, M. Hilton, and C. S. Timperley, “A Study on
Challenges of Testing Robotic Systems,” in International Conference
on Software Testing, Validation and Verification (ICST ’20), IEEE,
2020, pp. 96–107, DOI: 10.1109/ICST46399.2020.00020.

[18] A. Afzal, D. S. Katz, C. Le Goues, and C. S. Timperley, “Simulation
for Robotics Test Automation: Developer Perspectives,” in Conference
on Software Testing, Verification and Validation (ICST ’21), IEEE,
2021, pp. 263–274, DOI: 10.1109/ICST49551.2021.00036.
I. Malavolta, G. Lewis, B. Schmerl, P. Lago, and D. Garlan, “How
Do You Architect Your Robots? State of the Practice and Guidelines

[19]

for ROS-Based Systems,” in International Conference on Software En-
gineering: Software Engineering in Practice (ICSE-SEIP ’20), ACM,
2020, pp. 31–40, DOI: 10.1145/3377813.3381358.

[20] G. D. Abowd, R. Allen, and D. Garlan, “Formalizing Style to Un-
derstand Descriptions of Software Architecture,” 4, vol. 4, ACM, Oct.
1995, pp. 319–364, DOI: 10.1145/226241.226244.

[21] B. Schmerl and D. Garlan, “AcmeStudio: Supporting Style-Centered
Architecture Development (Research Demonstration),” in International
Conference on Software Engineering (ICSE’04), 23-28 May 2004,
pp. 704–705, DOI: 10.1109/ICSE.2004.1317497.

[22] D. Garlan, R. T. Monroe, and D. Wile, “Acme: Architectural De-
scription of Component-Based Systems,” pp. 47–68, 2000, [Online].
Available: https : / / www. cs . cmu . edu / afs / cs / project / able / ftp / acme -
fcbs/acme-fcbs.pdf.

[23] B. Johnson, Y. Song, E. Murphy-Hill, and R. Bowdidge, “Why
don’t software developers use static analysis tools to find bugs?” In
International Conference on Software Engineering (ICSE ’13), IEEE,
2013, pp. 672–681, DOI: 10.1109/ICSE.2013.6606613.

[24] M. Christakis and C. Bird, “What Developers Want and Need from
Program Analysis: An Empirical Study,” in International Conference
on Automated Software Engineering (ASE ’16), ACM, 2016, pp. 332–
343, DOI: 10.1145/2970276.2970347.
F. J. Damerau, “A technique for computer detection and correction of
spelling errors,” Commun. ACM, vol. 7, no. 3, pp. 171–176, Mar. 1964,
DOI: 10.1145/363958.363994.

[25]

[26] G. V. Bard, “Spelling-error tolerant, order-independent pass-phrases via
the damerau-levenshtein string-edit distance metric,” in Australasian
Symposium on ACSW Frontiers (ACSW’07), Australian Computer
Society, Inc., 2007, pp. 117–124, [Online]. Available: https://eprint.
iacr.org/2006/364.pdf.

[28]

[27] B. Goldfain, P. Drews, C. You, et al., “AutoRally: An Open Platform
for Aggressive Autonomous Driving,” IEEE Control Systems Maga-
zine, vol. 39, no. 1, pp. 26–55, 2019, DOI: 10 . 1109 / MCS . 2018 .
2876958.
S. Kato, E. Takeuchi, Y. Ishiguro, Y. Ninomiya, K. Takeda, and T.
Hamada, “An Open Approach to Autonomous Vehicles,” IEEE Micro,
vol. 35, no. 6, pp. 60–68, 2015, DOI: 10.1109/MM.2015.133.
[29] M. Wise, M. Ferguson, D. King, E. Diehr, and D. Dymesich, “Fetch
and freight: Standard platforms for service robot applications,” in
Workshop on autonomous mobile service robots, 2016, [Online]. Avail-
able: http://docs.fetch3staging.wpengine.com/FetchAndFreight2016.
pdf.

[31]

[32]

[30] D. Singh, E. Trivedi, Y. Sharma, and V. Niranjan, “TurtleBot: Design
and Hardware Component Selection,” in International Conference on
Computing, Power and Communication Technologies (GUCON ’18),
IEEE, 2018, pp. 805–809, DOI: 10.1109/GUCON.2018.8675050.
J.-P. Ore, C. Detweiler, and S. Elbaum, “Lightweight Detection of
Physical Unit Inconsistencies without Program Annotations,” in SIG-
SOFT International Symposium on Software Testing and Analysis
(ISSTA ’17), ACM, 2017, pp. 341–351, DOI: 10 . 1145 / 3092703 .
3092722.
S. Kate, J.-P. Ore, X. Zhang, S. Elbaum, and Z. Xu, “Phys: Probabilistic
Physical Unit Assignment and Inconsistency Detection,” in Joint Meet-
ing on European Software Engineering Conference and Symposium
on the Foundations of Software Engineering (ESEC/FSE ’18), ACM,
2018, pp. 563–573, DOI: 10.1145/3236024.3236035.
S. Kate, M. Chinn, H. Choi, X. Zhang, and S. Elbaum, “PHYS-
FRAME: Type Checking Physical Frames of Reference for Robotic
Systems,” in Joint Meeting on European Software Engineering Con-
ference and Symposium on the Foundations of Software Engineering
(ESEC/FSE ’21), ACM, 2021, pp. 45–56, DOI: 10 . 1145 / 3468264 .
3468608.

[33]

[34] C. Jung, A. Ahad, J. Jung, S. Elbaum, and Y. Kwon, “Swarmbug:
Debugging Configuration Bugs in Swarm Robotics,” in Joint Meeting
on European Software Engineering Conference and Symposium on the
Foundations of Software Engineering (ESEC/FSE ’21), ACM, 2021,
pp. 868–880, DOI: 10.1145/3468264.3468601.

[35] R. W. Schwanke, “An Intelligent Tool for Re-Engineering Software
Modularity,” in International Conference on Software Engineering
(ICSE ’91), IEEE, 1991, pp. 83–92, DOI: 10.1109/ICSE.1991.130626.
S. Patel, W. Chu, and R. Baxter, “A Measure for Composite Module
Cohesion,” in International Conference on Software Engineering (ICSE
’92), ACM, 1992, pp. 38–48, DOI: 10.1145/143062.143086.

[36]

[37]

L. Belady and C. Evangelisti, “System partitioning and its measure,”
Journal of Systems and Software (JSS), vol. 2, no. 1, pp. 23–29, 1981,
DOI: 10.1016/0164-1212(81)90043-1.

[38] D. Hutchens and V. Basili, “System Structure Analysis: Clustering with
Data Bindings,” Transactions on Software Engineering (TSE), vol. SE-
11, no. 8, pp. 749–757, 1985, DOI: 10.1109/TSE.1985.232524.
[39] D. Doval, S. Mancoridis, and B. Mitchell, “Automatic clustering of
software systems using a genetic algorithm,” in International Workshop
on Software Technology and Engineering Practice (STEP ’99), IEEE,
1999, pp. 73–81, DOI: 10.1109/STEP.1999.798481.
S. Mancoridis, B. Mitchell, Y. Chen, and E. Gansner, “Bunch: A
clustering tool for the recovery and maintenance of software system
structures,” in International Conference on Software Maintenance
(ICSM ’99), IEEE, 1999, pp. 50–59, DOI: 10.1109/ICSM.1999.792498.
[41] O. Maqbool and H. Babri, “The weighted combined algorithm: A
linkage algorithm for software clustering,” in European Conference on
Software Maintenance and Reengineering (CSMR ’04), IEEE, 2004,
pp. 15–24, DOI: 10.1109/CSMR.2004.1281402.

[40]

[43]

[42] O. Maqbool and H. Babri, “Hierarchical Clustering for Software
Architecture Recovery,” Transactions on Software Engineering (TSE),
vol. 33, no. 11, pp. 759–780, 2007, DOI: 10.1109/TSE.2007.70732.
P. Andritsos, P. Tsaparas, R. J. Miller, and K. C. Sevcik, “LIMBO:
Scalable Clustering of Categorical Data,” in International Confer-
ence on Extending Database Technology (EDBT ’04) - Advances in
Database Technology, Springer, 2004, pp. 123–146, DOI: 10.1007/978-
3-540-24741-8 9.

[45]

[44] A. Corazza, S. Di Martino, V. Maggio, and G. Scanniello, “Investi-
gating the use of lexical information for software system clustering,”
in European Conference on Software Maintenance and Reengineering
(CSMR ’11), IEEE, 2011, pp. 35–44, DOI: 10.1109/CSMR.2011.8.
J. Garcia, D. Popescu, C. Mattmann, N. Medvidovic, and Y. Cai,
“Enhancing architectural recovery using concerns,” in International
Conference on Automated Software Engineering (ASE ’11), IEEE,
2011, pp. 552–555, DOI: 10.1109/ASE.2011.6100123.
L. Chouambe, B. Klatt, and K. Krogmann, “Reverse Engineering
Software-Models of Component-Based Systems,” in European Confer-
ence on Software Maintenance and Reengineering (CSMR ’08), IEEE,
2008, pp. 93–102, DOI: 10.1109/CSMR.2008.4493304.
Z. T. Sinkala and S. Herold, “InMap: Automated Interactive Code-to-
Architecture Mapping Recommendations,” in International Conference
on Software Architecture (ICSA ’21), IEEE, 2021, pp. 173–183, DOI:
10.1109/ICSA51549.2021.00024.

[46]

[47]

[48] D. R. Harris, H. B. Reubenstein, and A. S. Yeh, “Reverse Engineering
to the Architectural Level,” in International Conference on Software
Engineering (ICSE ’95), IEEE, 1995, pp. 186–186, DOI: 10 . 1145 /
225014.225032.

[50]

[49] B. Schmerl, J. Aldrich, D. Garlan, R. Kazman, and H. Yan, “Discov-
ering Architectures from Running Systems,” Transactions on Software
Engineering (TSE), vol. 32, no. 7, Jul. 2006, DOI: 10.1109/TSE.2006.
66.
J. Moe and D. A. Carr, “Understanding distributed systems via execu-
tion trace data,” in International Workshop on Program Comprehension
(IWPC ’01), IEEE, 2001, pp. 60–67, DOI: 10.1109/WPC.2001.921714.
[51] A. Marburger and D. Herzberg, “E-CARES research project: Under-
standing complex legacy telecommunication systems,” in European
Conference on Software Maintenance and Reengineerin (CSMR ’01),
IEEE, 2001, pp. 139–147, DOI: 10.1109/CSMR.2001.914978.
[52] N. C. Mendonc¸a and J. Kramer, “An approach for recovering dis-
tributed system architectures,” Automated Software Engineering, vol. 8,
no. 3, pp. 311–354, Aug. 2001, DOI: 10.1023/A:1011217720860.
L. Passos, R. Terra, M. T. Valente, R. Diniz, and N. Mendonc¸a, “Static
Architecture-Conformance Checking: An Illustrative Overview,” IEEE
Software, vol. 27, no. 5, pp. 82–89, 2010, DOI: 10.1109/MS.2009.117.
[54] A. Shokri, J. C. S. Santos, and M. Mirakhorli, “ArCode: Facilitating the
Use of Application Frameworks to Implement Tactics and Patterns,” in
International Conference on Software Architecture (ICSA ’21), IEEE,
2021, pp. 138–149, DOI: 10.1109/ICSA51549.2021.00021.

[53]

[55] D. Hou and H. Hoover, “Using SCL to specify and check design intent
in source code,” Transactions on Software Engineering (TSE), vol. 32,
no. 6, pp. 404–423, 2006, DOI: 10.1109/TSE.2006.60.

