
=====PAGE 1=====
Software  
Catalog
2025-2026
NASA Technology Transfer Program
nasa.gov
=====PAGE 2=====
i
I am pleased to present the seventh edition  
of the NASA Software Catalog. 
At least since NASA launched NASTRAN, the most sophisticated modeling 
software of its day in the late 1960s, the space agency has been at the forefront 
of programming that simulates aerodynamics, structures, and materials. Every 
major aircraft and spacecraft manufacturer, and many auto companies, rely on 
NASA software to design their vehicles. Programs like TetrUSS and OVERFLOW 
let them see how a given design will interact with the air, and NASGRO predicts 
damage to ensure safety. Nearly 60 years after its release, NASTRAN remains 
hugely popular, incorporated into several commercial programs and used to 
design everything from electric vehicles to oil and gas equipment. 
Just last year, the agency released Aviary, an open-source code that modernizes 
aircraft simulation, designed to handle newer concepts like hybrid-electric aircraft and capable of linking to 
other programs, expanding its capabilities. 
But NASA missions require codes that perform an enormous variety of tasks, from project cost estimation 
to robotic control to identifying potential system failures. The agency has also created a host of software 
for analyzing the mountains of Earth-observation data coming in from satellites. Recent examples include a 
program that calculates landslide risks around the world and another that predicts the probability of lightning 
strikes up to 15 minutes in advance. 
The creation of all these codes was funded by taxpayers, and NASA works to make as many as possible 
publicly available and easy to access. That’s where the biannual NASA Software Catalog comes in. In the 
pages of the 2025-2026 catalog, you’ll find more than 1,000 programs written by NASA engineers, organized 
into 15 categories and available for download. 
This software was created to enable NASA missions, but it can often be repurposed for other applications. 
For example, the 2022 Software of the Year, which investigates micro-scale material behavior, was made 
to evaluate spacecraft thermal protection systems but has been used to analyze parachutes, batteries, 
meteorites, and more. These are some other popular examples: 
Root Cause Analysis Tool identifies corrective actions to prevent recurrence of an accident or close call. 
Earth Global Reference Atmospheric Model provides atmospheric qualities for any month and at any altitude 
and location in Earth’s atmosphere. 
The Schedule Test and Assessment Tool is a schedule management software add-in for Microsoft Project. 
Copernicus Trajectory Design and Optimization System does just what its name says. 
WinPlot Graphical Display System generates displays of real-time and post-test data from test items  
and facilities. 
NASA’s Technology Transfer program is always working to get technology that was created for space 
exploration and other NASA missions into the hands of the private sector, where it can generate new products, 
power startups, and improve everyday lives. The Software Catalog is one way we do that. 
We hope one or more of the codes here turns out to be just what you or your business needs. 
Daniel Lockney
Technology Transfer Program Executive
Space Technology Mission Directorate
NASA Headquarters

=====PAGE 3=====
ii
Table of Contents
Using the Catalog  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . iii
Requesting Software   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . iv
Points of Contact   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . iv
NASA Software of the Year Awards  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . v
Top 20 Software Codes   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . vii
Aeronautics  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1
Autonomous Systems  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
Business Systems and Project Management   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 30
Crew and Life Support  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 37
Data and Image Processing  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 42
Data Servers Processing and Handling  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 92
Design and Integration Tools  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 105
Electronics and Electrical Power  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 131
Environmental Science   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 136
Materials and Processing  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 158
Operations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 164
Propulsion  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 175
Structures and Mechanisms   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 183
System Testing  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 189
Vehicle Management  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 201
=====PAGE 4=====
iii
Using the Catalog
Offering an extensive portfolio of software products for a wide variety of technical 
applications, the NASA Software Catalog is organized into 15 broad subject  
matter categories. 
The codes within each category are listed alphabetically. All catalog entries 
include the software title, the product ID number (known internally as the NASA 
case number), a short description, and the software’s specified release type. 
Each code listed in the catalog is available at no cost and has been evaluated  
for access requirements and restrictions:
 n General Public Release:  For codes with a broad release and no nondisclosure 
or export control restrictions
 n Open-Source Release:  For collaborative efforts in which programmers improve 
upon codes originally developed by NASA and share the changes
 n U.S. Release Only:  For codes available to U.S. persons only, with no further 
transfer of the software allowed without the prior written approval of NASA
 n U.S. and Foreign Release:  For codes that are available to U.S. persons and 
(under special circumstances) persons outside of the U.S.
 n U.S. Government Purpose Release:  For codes that are to be used on behalf 
of the U.S. government
•  Project Release:  For use under a contract, grant, or agreement
•  Interagency Release:  For use by U.S. government agencies
• 	NASA Release:  For use only by NASA personnel and contractors
The Software Catalog is continually updated. Please visit the NASA 
Technology Transfer Portal for the latest updates and revisions: 
technology.nasa.gov
=====PAGE 5=====
iv
Requesting Software
NASA software may be requested through the NASA Software Catalog website:  
software.nasa.gov
1. Select the Request Software button below the item description for the catalog entry.  
Many open-source software codes and mobile apps provide a URL link so that the 
requester can download the software directly; it is not necessary to use the Request 
Software button for these codes.
2. Complete the request form. All required fields must be filled in before you can submit  
your request. Requests will automatically be routed to the appropriate center’s  
Software Release Authority (SRA) for processing. 
Contact
NASA has Software Release Authorities ready to assist you with your software requests and 
questions. You can contact them by sending an email to NASA-Software-Usage-Agreement-
Team@mail.nasa.gov. Please provide the software case number in the subject line to help 
direct emails.

=====PAGE 6=====
v
NASA Software  
of the Year Awards
Each year NASA recognizes development teams that have set high 
standards for software that is creative, usable, and transferable. 
An advisory panel with representatives from across the agency 
reviews entries and recommends winners to the Inventions and 
Contributions Board.
2023
Landslide Hazard Assessment for Situational 
Awareness (LHASA), Version 2.0
NASA has awarded the prestigious NASA 
Software of the Year Award to a team of scientists 
and engineers at the Earth Sciences Division 
of NASA’s Goddard Space Flight Center in 
Greenbelt, Maryland. The team received the 
award for developing a data-driven software tool 
called the Landslide Hazard Assessment for 
Situational Awareness (LHASA), version 2.0 that 
is designed to provide situational awareness for 
rainfall-triggered landslide hazard events at any 
location around the world.
LHASA is a system that incorporates landslide 
data inventories from around the world within a 
machine-learning framework to estimate the relative 
probability of a landslide occurrence. LHASA considers 
landslide hazard over space and time on a roughly 
one-kilometer grid size worldwide, from 60 degrees 
North to 60 degrees South latitude. These hazard 
estimates are intended to enable improved awareness 
and help facilitate disaster planning and response from 
regional to global scales and across a broad range 
of stakeholders, such as government agencies, relief 
organizations, emergency responders, and insurers.
Members of the LHASA development team include 
Dalia Kirschbaum, Thomas Stanley, Robert Emberson, 
Pukar Amatya, Garrett Benz, Marin Clark, Patrice G. 
Cappelaere, and William Medwedeff.
A free and open-source software, LHASA can be found 
on and downloaded from the NASA Software Catalog 
at https://software.nasa.gov/software/GSC-18595-1

=====PAGE 7=====
vi
2024 Co-Winners 
Orbital Debris Engineering Model (ORDEM)
The Orbital Debris Engineering Model (ORDEM), 
developed at Johnson Space Center in Houston, 
represents the state of the art in orbital debris models 
for engineering analysis. It is data-driven, relying on 
large quantities of radar, optical, in situ, and laboratory 
measurement data. It was the first software to include a 
model for different debris material densities, population 
models from low Earth orbit to geosynchronous orbit, 
and uncertainties in each debris population. 
ORDEM allows users to compute the orbital debris 
flux —  t he number of objects passing at a given space 
and time —  f or any Earth orbit. This allows satellite 
designers to mitigate damage to a spacecraft using 
shielding and design choices, extending the life of 
the mission and its experiments. The model can also 
simulate debris telescope and radar observations 
from the ground. This can help design experiments 
to measure the meteoroid and orbital debris 
environments. 
ORDEM is used heavily by those who design, build, 
and test shielding for spacecraft and rocket upper 
stages. The fidelity of the ORDEM model allows for 
the optimization of shielding, balanced with mission 
success criteria, risks, and costs. 
ORDEM is NASA’s primary tool for computing 
and mitigating risks posed by orbital debris. The 
Department of Defense and other government 
agencies also use it, as do Boeing, 
SpaceX, Northrop Grumman, 
the University of Colorado, 
California Polytechnic 
State University, and 
many others. 
Prognostics Python Packages (ProgPy), developed at Ames Research Center in Silicon Valley, California, is an 
open-source Python package supporting research and development of prognostics, health management, and 
predictive maintenance tools. The field of prognostics and health management aims at estimating the physical 
health of a system, such as a motor or battery, and predicting how the system will degrade with use. The results 
are used to prevent failure, preserve safety, and reduce maintenance costs.  
This is a difficult and complex undertaking. Any small discrepancy between the model and the actual system 
is compounded repeatedly, resulting in a large deviation in the prediction. For this reason, prognostics requires 
complex and capable algorithms, models, and software systems. 
ProgPy can be thought of as three innovations: the prognostic models, which describe the prognostic behavior 
of the system of interest; the prognostic engine, which performs the prognostics and health state estimation; 
and prognostic support tools, which help develop, tune, benchmark, evaluate, and visualize the results. 
ProgPy’s innovative framework opens it to a wide range of applications, providing unique features and a breadth 
and depth of capabilities not available in other state-of-the-art software packages. It equips users with the 
tools to do prognostics in their applications as-is, whereas other prognostics software is often developed for 
specific use cases or based on a single modeling method. ProgPy’s approach opens a world of possibilities for 
researchers, practitioners, and developers in NASA and U.S. industries. 
Prognostics Python Packages (ProgPy)
=====PAGE 8=====
vii
Top 20 Software Codes
1
Debris Assessment Software (DAS),  
Version 3.2.6
Operations  
JSC M SC-26690-1  P ages 165,  168
2
Chemical Equilibrium Applications  
(CEA)
Propulsion 
GRC L EW-17687-1  P ages 176, 178
3
Project Cost-Estimating Capability  
(PCEC)
Business Systems and Project 
Management 
MSFC M FS-33187-2  P ages 31, 35
4
WinPlot Graphical Display System
Data and Image Processing 
MSFC M FS-31664-1  P ages 43, 91  
5
TetrUSS: Computational Fluid Dynamics 
Software
Design and Integration Tools 
LaRC  L AR-16882-1  P ages 106, 127 
6
Orbital Debris Engineering Model  
(ORDEM), Version 3.2 
Environmental Science 
JSC M SC-25457-1  P ages 137 , 151 
7
Schedule Test and Assessment Tool  
(STAT), Version 5.0
Business Systems and Project 
Management 
MSFC M FS-33362-1  P ages 31, 35
8
Chemical Equilibrium with Applications  
in MATLAB (CEAM)
Propulsion 
MSFC M FS-33320-1  P ages 176, 178
9
Failure Modes and Effects Analysis Tool 
(FMEA)
Design and Integration Tools 
JSC  M SC-25379-1  P ages 106, 112
10
Earth Global Reference Atmospheric  
Model (Earth GRAM) 2016
Environmental Science 
MSFC M FS-32780-2  P ages 137 , 142 
=====PAGE 9=====
viii
Are these in your toolbox?
11
System Identification Programs for 
Aircraft (SIDPAC)
System Testing 
LaRC LAR-16100-1 Pages 190, 199
12
NASA Root Cause Analysis Tool (RCAT)
Business Systems and Project 
Management  
GRC LEW-19737-1 Pages 31, 34
13
Global Reference Atmospheric Model 
(GRAM) Suite
Environmental Science 
MSFC MFS-33888-1 Pages 137 , 145 
14
Automated Triangle Geometry Processing 
for Surface Modeling and Cartesian Grid 
Generation (Cart3D)
Design and Integration Tools 
ARC  ARC-14275-1 Pages 106, 107 
15
PLOT3D, Version 4.1
Aeronautics 
ARC  ARC-14400-1 Pages 2, 15 
16
Knife v1.0 Boolean Substraction Library  
for Polyhedra 
Design and Integration Tools 
LaRC LAR-17481-1 Page 115
17
Flight Optimization System (FLOPS) 
Software, Version 9
Aeronautics 
LaRC LAR-18934-1 Pages 2, 7 
18
FUN3D, Version 14.1
Aeronautics 
LaRC LAR-20188-1 Pages 2, 8 
19
GNSS-Inferred Positioning System  
and Orbit Analysis Simulation Software 
(GIPSY-OASIS)
Operations  
JPL NPO-19636-1 Pages 165, 169
20
NASA Design and Analysis  
of Rotorcraft (NDARC)
Aeronautics 
ARC ARC-16265-1 Page 13 
=====PAGE 10=====
11
Aeronautics
Air Traffic Management Tools, Modeling  
and Simulation Tools
A quad-rotor drone carries an atmospheric probe model in October of 2024. The drone released the probe above Rogers 
Dry Lake, a flight area adjacent to NASA’s Armstrong Flight Research Center in Edwards, California, where the probe was 
designed and built. Credit: NASA
11
=====PAGE 11=====
2
Aeronautics
NASA Technology Transfer Program  Software Catalog 2025-26
Featured Software
PLOT3D, Version 4.1 AR C-14400-1
PLOT3D is a computer graphics program designed to visualize the grid and solutions of structured 
computational fluid dynamics (CFD) datasets. Version 4.1 uses the OpenGL/GLUT graphics library. Several 
new features have been added to the code. These include: automatic computation of grid coordinate 
minimum/maximum; an orphan point plotting function; the ability to read double-precision unformatted 
data; negative grid index processing; random specification of colors for different walls; and simultaneous 
specification of walls and subsets for all zones.
U.S. Release Only
Flight Optimization System (FLOPS) Software, Version 9 LA R-18934-1
FLOPS is a multidisciplinary system of computer programs for conceptual and preliminary design and 
evaluation of advanced aircraft concepts. It consists of six primary modules: weights, aerodynamics, 
propulsion data scaling and interpolation, mission performance, takeoff and landing, and program control.
General Public Release
FUN3D, Version 14.1 LA R-20188-1
FUN3D version 14.1 is a suite of computational fluid dynamics simulation and design tools that uses mixed-
element unstructured grids and optional overset topologies to solve the Navier-Stokes equations for static 
and dynamic applications. Various turbulence treatments are available.  A discretely-consistent adjoint 
solver enables efficient gradient-based design optimization. Mesh adaptation capabilities are also available. 
Gas models include compressible and incompressible perfect-gas approaches, as well as general finite-rate 
chemistry for flows in thermochemical nonequilibrium. GPU acceleration is also available for many of the 
capabilities.
U.S. Release Only
2
=====PAGE 12=====
3
Aeronautics
NASA Technology Transfer Program  Software Catalog 2025-26
AcousticAnalogies.jl: A Propeller/Rotor Acoustics Code  
Especially Suitable for Gradient-Based Optimization L EW-20281-1
AcousticAnalogies.jl is an implementation of Farassat’s “”formulation 1A”” (F1A), a mathematical technique 
used to predict the acoustics radiated by a fluid flow. The F1A method, like all acoustic analogies, is a 
solution to an inhomogeneous wave equation. The wave equation is derived by manipulating the Navier-
Stokes equation into a “”propagation”” left-hand side and a “”source”” right-hand side. The wave equation 
is solved using the free-space Green’s function, giving an expression with two surface integrals and one 
volume integral (typically ignored). The integrands of these integrals represent the acoustic sources in 
the flow, and computing them requires knowledge of the motion of and forces acting on the integration 
surfaces. These inputs may come from experiment, but more often are taken from the outputs of an 
aerodynamics code.
Open Source
ADOPT: Automatic Discovery of Precursors in Time Series A RC-18198-1
A data mining/machine learning algorithm that analyzes large volumes of historical data to find complex 
trends among several sensory variables simultaneously to find precursors. ADOPT’s data mining approach 
captures real-world effects such as human factors, weather, geographic constraints, operating procedures, 
airline strategies etc. that are difficult to capture using first-principle models. ADOPT’s capabilities include 
new functionality to discover precursors to events of interest by mining time series data, reduces the time 
required by subject matter experts to discover and analyze precursors from large volumes of data, detects 
the likelihood of the adverse event earlier to alert the operator on an impending failure, assists in explaining 
the event of interest with identified precursors.
Open Source
Advanced Geared Turbofan 30,000 (AGTF30) L EW-19717-1
The Advanced Geared Turbofan 30,000 (AGTF30) is a geared turbofan simulation that utilizes the Toolbox 
for the Modeling and Analysis of Thermodynamic Systems (T-MATS) to create a steady-state and dynamic 
engine model within MATLAB/Simulink. The engine model is based upon an N+3 geared turbofan concept 
with a controller that allows dynamic operation throughout the flight envelope.
Open Source
AERO2S: Subsonic Aerodynamic Analysis of Wings With Leading-  
and Trailing-Edge Flaps In Combination with Canard or Horizontal Tail Surfaces L AR-14458-1
Subsonic modified linear theory method providing estimates of the longitudinal aerodynamic characteristics 
of conceptual airplane lifting surface arrangements. The method is particularly well suited to configurations 
which, because of high speed flight requirements, must employ thin wings with highly swept leading edges. 
The code is applicable to wings with either sharp or rounded leading edges. The code provides theoretical 
pressure distributions over the wing, the canard or horizontal tail, and the deflected flap surfaces as well as 
estimates of the wing lift, drag, and pitching moments which account for attainable leading edge thrust and 
leading edge separation vortex forces.
U.S. Release Only
Aircraft NOise Prediction Program 2 (ANOPP2) L AR-18567-1
The next-generation Aircraft NOise Prediction Program (ANOPP), called ANOPP2, provides the capability 
and framework to integrate acoustic approaches for aircraft noise component prediction, propulsion system 
installation effects, and overall sound propagation to the far-field. The predictions from ANOPP2 include the 
fidelity and flexibility required to predict outside the current experience base. A focal point of ANOPP2 is a 
combination of acoustic approaches; that is, to offer several options depending on requested fidelity and 
execution speed. This allows ANOPP2 to include fast prediction methods for design optimization, as well  
as the fidelity required to provide insight into controlling noise physics.
U.S. and Foreign Release
=====PAGE 13=====
4
Aeronautics
NASA Technology Transfer Program  Software Catalog 2025-26
Airfoil Machine Learning Code and Dataset LEW-20283-1
This is the supplemental code and dataset for a paper titled: Predicting 2D Airfoil Performance Using Graph 
Neural Networks
Open Source
Airspace Concepts Evaluation System (ACES) ARC-15068-1
From gate departure to gate arrival, ACES is a dynamic, event-based computer simulation of aircraft 
operations in the National Airspace System (NAS). The technology’s software-agent infrastructure provides 
flexibility in configuring custom simulations and enables explicit modeling of command and control entities 
operating within the NAS.
U.S. and Foreign Release
Aircraft Noise Prediction Program (ANOPP and ANOPP2) LAR-19861-1
The NASA Aircraft Noise Prediction Program provides a capability to predict noise from aircraft in flight. 
Since its inception, ANOPP has been relied upon to provide empirical methods for the source prediction, 
propagation, and calculation of aircraft noise. The second generation ANOPP (ANOPP2) provided the 
capability and a framework to integrate acoustic approaches for aircraft noise component prediction, 
propulsion system installation effects, and overall sound propagation to the far-field of varying degrees 
of granularity. While ANOPP provides a much needed empirical database that is continually relied 
upon by ANOPP2 for fixed wing aircraft prediction, ANOPP2 provides the flexibility to predict noise for 
unconventional aircraft in modern prediction environments. ANOPP and ANOPP2 are both required for most 
applications.
U.S. Release Only
Apparatus for Evaluating Software Decision Logic (ADEPT) ARC-14928-1A
The ADEPT design tool integrates a graphical user interface with an automation decision-logic application. 
The software generates testable prototypes for traditional usability evaluations. Exportable products can be 
added to the base architecture.
U.S. and Foreign Release
ARC2D: Efficient Two-Dimensional Solution Methods for Navier-Stokes Equations ARC-12112-1
ARC2D is a computational fluid dynamics program developed at the Ames Research Center specifically 
for two-dimensional airfoil and simply connected geometries. The program uses implicit finite-difference 
techniques to solve two-dimensional Euler equations and Navier-Stokes equations. It is based on the Beam 
and Warming implicit approximate factorization algorithm in generalized coordinates. The methods are 
either time accurate or accelerated non-time accurate steady state schemes. The evolution of the solution 
through time is physically realistic; good solution accuracy is dependent on mesh spacing and boundary 
conditions.
U.S. Release Only
BL2D: Two-Dimensional and Axisymmetric Boundary Layer Code  LAR-16713-GS
BL2D is an efficient and fourth-order-accurate method to compute two-dimensional and axisymmetric 
boundary layers on aerospace vehicle wings from low-speed to hypersonic speeds. Aerospace applications 
include boundary-layer stability analysis, transonic wing design, and laminar flow wing design.
U.S. Release Only
=====PAGE 14=====
5
Aeronautics
NASA Technology Transfer Program  Software Catalog 2025-26
Computational Aerosciences Productivity and Execution (CAPE) ARC-18753-1
CAPE is an end-to-end framework for running large numbers of Computational Fluid Dynamic (CFD) 
simulations, extracting aerodynamic performance data, and building high-quality, complex aerodynamic 
databases. CAPE enables more complex run matrices and improved procedures for other CFD or 
computational aerosciences tools. Version 1.0 provides a common interface for Cart3D, FUN3D, and 
OVERFLOW that supports case setup, running the actual CFD solver in a supercomputing environment, 
report generation, data extraction, and creating high-quality databases. 
U.S. Release Only
CFD Utility Software Library ARC-14467-1B
This is a collection of ~200 software applications build upon two dozen subroutine libraries, mostly for 
manipulating the grids and flow solutions associated with computational fluid dynamics (CFD). These 
application programs, Fortran 90 modules, and library subroutines are generalized as far as possible with 
reuse and portability in mind. They are applicable to all flight regimes - subsonic, transonic, supersonic, and 
hypersonic. They operate on files in PLOT3D and/or Tecplot format, which represent de facto standards 
at many sites within academia, NASA, and industry. All such sites should have comparable utilities but 
typically lack this kind of comprehensive collection of well designed, well implemented and efficient utilities 
maintained for general use.
Open Source
COMDES-MELT: A Turbofan Engine Icing Risk Analysis Tool LEW-20027-1
This engine icing risk prediction code is a mean-line compressor analysis code coupled with an ice crystal 
thermodynamic state code. COMDES-MELT computes the velocity, pressure, temperature, and flow 
angles at the leading edge and trailing edge of each blade row, at the hub, mean, and tip sections. This 
compressor code includes the ability to calculate the effects of water vapor on the fluid properties of the air 
– water vapor mixture. With inputted parameters as the precursors to ice accretion, the blade row within the 
compression system can be identified that is likely to experience ice buildup at a particular engine operating 
condition in the vehicle flight trajectory.
U.S. Release Only
Control Allocation Technique to Recover from Pilot-Induced Oscillations (CAPIO)  ARC-17115-1A
The CAPIO system is designed to operate within an aircraft’s flight control system to alleviate pilot-induced 
oscillation tendencies in an aircraft without adversely impacting aircraft efficiency. The main idea behind the 
concept is to minimize the phase lag introduced to the system due to control surface rate saturation. The 
CAPIO system is designed specifically for multi-input/multi-output applications. This implementation utilizes: 
(1) online estimation of phase lag introduced by control surface rate limiting, (2) online adjustment of control 
allocation weighting terms, and (3) an optimization algorithm that calculates the optimal control solution.
U.S. Release Only
Coordinate Systems Class Library LAR-19767-1
This library of classes represents various coordinate systems and provides the transformations between 
them. Coordinate systems represented are: East-North-Up (ENU), Downrange-Crossrange-Above (DCA), 
Latitude-Longitude-Altitude (LLA), Earth-Centered-Fixed (ECF), and Azimuth-Elevation-Range (AER).
Open Source
=====PAGE 15=====
6
Aeronautics
NASA Technology Transfer Program  Software Catalog 2025-26
Core Flight Executive, Version 6.7 GSC-18128-1
The Core Flight Executive (cFE) is a software framework designed for use on embedded systems. The 
cFE defines an Application Programmer Interface (API) to the following services: Software Bus, Time 
Services, Event Services, Executive Services, Table Services, and File Services.  The cFE defines a portable 
application runtime environment that allows developers to rebuild the same applications code and run it on 
many different hardware/operating system platforms.  The same application code can be developed and 
unit tested on a desktop environment then ported to the target-embedded processor for final verification 
and validation.
Open Source
CPR: Formally Verified Compact Position Reporting Algorithm LAR-19679-1
The Compact Position Reporting (CPR) algorithm consists of a set of functions defined in the standard 
RTCA-DO-260B/Eurocae ED-102A, Minimum Operational Performance Standards for 1090 MHz extended 
squitter Automatic Dependent Surveillance – Broadcast (ADS- B) and Traffic Information Services - 
Broadcast (TIS-B). These functions encode and decode aircraft positions. CPR is a formally verified 
implementation of CPR’s functions using computer arithmetic in fixed- and floating-point formats.
Open Source
DAA-Displays (Detect-and-Avoid Display Widgets) LAR-19568-1
DAA-Displays (Detect-and-Avoid Display Widgets) is an open-source framework for creating interactive 
cockpit display simulations. The framework includes widgets for typical detect-and-avoid applications such 
as maneuver guidance bands, alerting symbols, aircraft states, etc.
Open Source
Data & Reasoning Fabric (DRF) Core ARC-18884-1
The complexity and density of operations are expected to increase significantly over the next several 
decades. Data & Reasoning Fabric (DRF) addresses these challenges by enabling a self-sustaining 
marketplace where data and reasoning providers can “advertise” their services, and consumers can 
discover, vet, purchase, interconnect, and utilize these services to accomplish their missions. DRF is 
a framework for an ecosystem that encourages commercial industries to exchange information while 
monetizing their digital assets and maintaining control of intellectual property. 
U.S. Release Only
Detect and Avoid Alerting Logic for Unmanned Systems (DAIDALUS) LAR-18464-1
This is a software library that implements a detect-and-avoid concept for uncrewed aircraft systems. It 
includes algorithms for determining the current well-clear status between two aircraft and for predicting a 
well-clear violation within a lookahead time, assuming non-maneuvering trajectories. DAIDALUS implements 
algorithms for computing maneuver guidance, assuming a simple kinematic trajectory model for the 
ownship. Maneuver guidance is returned in the form of range of track, ground speed, vertical speed, and 
altitude values called bands. These bands represent areas in the airspace the ownship should avoid in order 
to maintain well-clear with respect to traffic aircraft. DAIDALUS implements a pair-wise alerting logic that is 
based on a list of increasingly conservative alert levels. It’s  implemented in C++ and Java. The functional 
requirements of the core DAIDALUS algorithms have been formally specified in the Prototype Verification 
System (PVS). The correctness of these algorithms has been formally verified in PVS, and the software 
implementations have been validated against the formal models using stressing test cases.
Open Source
=====PAGE 16=====
7
Aeronautics
NASA Technology Transfer Program  Software Catalog 2025-26
Easy Aeroservoelasticity (EZASE): A Tool to Simulate Aircraft Wing Geometry DRC-014-036
This is an easy-to-use MATLAB-based finite element modeling and simulation tool for aeroservoelastic 
analysis of rectangular wings with trailing-edge control surfaces. It includes a tutorial on structural finite 
element modeling (FEM_Tutorial.m) using elements such as 12-DOF plates and 6-DOF beams. The aero 
tutorial (DLM_VLM_Tutorial.m) shows how to code doublet lattice and vortex lattice (with symmetry 
capability). Together the tutorials can be used to compare to experimental studies such as ground vibration 
testing, cantilever beam analysis, as well as wind tunnel testing.
General Public Release
Evolutionary Mission Trajectory Generator (EMTG) GSC-16824-1
EMTG is a global trajectory optimization tool intended for interplanetary mission design. The technology 
automatically searches for the optimal sequence of planetary flybys and propulsive maneuvers for maximizing 
payload delivery at a destination. Designed for minimal user oversight, EMTG requires only start location, 
destination, allowable launch-date range, allowable flight time, and minimal spacecraft hardware information.
Open Source
EZ4D LAR-16798-GS
NASA’s EZ4D software is a time-accurate, three-dimensional Navier-Stokes solver for unstructured meshes. 
The software framework utilizes generic template programming in C++ to allow users to extend the code for 
simulations of any general conservation laws. Shared-memory multi-thread, as well as distributed-memory 
MPI paradigms are implemented in EZ4D to facilitate efficient large-scale parallel numerical simulations.
U.S. Release Only
Finite-Rate Chemistry, Overset-Grid, Dual-Time Combustion-Reentry Code ARC-15601-1
This technology modifies the OVERFLOW code for finite rate and equilibrium chemistry by substituting 
the perfect gas model built into the code with a model assuming a gas made up of a mixture of thermally 
perfect gases. Four extra field variables were added, corresponding to pressure, temperature, coefficient  
of thermal conductivity, and the new pressure derivative X.
U.S. Government Purpose Release
Flight Awareness Collaboration Tool (FACT) ARC-17793-1
The Flight Awareness Collaboration Tool (FACT) is designed to assist airline dispatchers and others in 
managing winter weather events. It gathers all of the necessary weather, air traffic, airport, and other 
information onto one screen. FACT can be used by airline dispatchers to manage the airline fleet prior to and 
including the day of the winter weather event. It also has built-in automation tools that can predict the impact 
of winter weather on airport capacity. 
U.S. Government Purpose Release
Flight Optimization System (FLOPS) Software, Version 9 LAR-18934-1
FLOPS is a multidisciplinary system of computer programs for conceptual and preliminary design and 
evaluation of advanced aircraft concepts. It consists of six primary modules: weights, aerodynamics, 
propulsion data scaling and interpolation, mission performance, takeoff and landing, and program control.
General Public Release
Floating-Point and Real ChecKer (FPRoCK) LAR-19553-1
This tool decides the satisfiability of a set of mixed real and floating-point constraints. If this set of 
constraints has at least one solution, it returns one of the solutions, otherwise it returns UNSAT indicating 
that the set is unsatisfiable.
Open Source
=====PAGE 17=====
8
Aeronautics
NASA Technology Transfer Program  Software Catalog 2025-26
FRET: Formal Requirements Elicitation Tool ARC-18066-1
FRET is a framework for the elicitation, formalization, and understanding of requirements. FRET allows its 
user to enter hierarchical system requirements in a structured natural language. Requirements written in this 
language are assigned unambiguous semantics. FRET supports its user in understanding the semantics 
and reformulating requirements if applicable, by utilizing a variety of forms for each requirement: natural 
language description, formal mathematical logics, diagrams, and interactive simulation. FRET exports 
requirements into forms that can be used by a variety of analysis tools, such as Cocosim, Simulink Design 
Verifier, Kind, and SMV.
Open Source
FUN3D, Version 14.1 LAR-20188-1
FUN3D version 14.1 is a suite of computational fluid dynamics simulation and design tools that uses 
mixed-element unstructured grids and optional overset topologies to solve the Navier-Stokes equations 
for static and dynamic applications. Various turbulence treatments are available.  A discretely-consistent 
adjoint solver enables efficient gradient-based design optimization. Mesh adaptation capabilities are 
also available. Gas models include compressible and incompressible perfect-gas approaches, as well 
as general finite-rate chemistry for flows in thermochemical nonequilibrium. GPU acceleration is also 
available for many of the capabilities.
U.S. Release Only
Generic Command and Telemetry Applications  
for the Core Flight Software Framework (CI-TO) MSC-26175-1
This set of applications provides general purpose, configurable, and extensible spacecraft commanding 
and telemetry functionality supporting a wide variety of communications protocols and transports, and was 
designed, built, and intended for reuse.
U.S. Government Purpose Release
GFR: Glenn Flux Reconstruction LEW-19709-1
GFR is a high-order computational fluid dynamics (CFD) Fortran code for large-eddy simulations. It is based 
on the simple and efficient flux reconstruction method and accurate to an arbitrary order through a user- 
supplied input parameter. It is currently capable of using unstructured grids containing quadrilateral or  
hexahedra elements.
Open Source
GlennOPT LEW-20176-1
GlennOPT is a multi-objective optimization tool for CFD (Computational Fluid Dynamics) applications. It is 
specifically designed to handle optimization problems involving multiple objectives.
Open Source
Grid Express (GridEx): A Framework-Based Unstructured Grid Generation Tool LAR-16423-1
GridEx is an interactive software system developed by Geometry Laboratory of the NASA Langley Research 
Center for the generation of unstructured meshes. The software integrates native CAD geometry access, 
multiple unstructured meshing algorithms, and interactive 3D computer graphics through a graphical user 
interface (GUI) resulting in a package that is both powerful and easy to use.
U.S. Release Only
=====PAGE 18=====
9
Aeronautics
NASA Technology Transfer Program  Software Catalog 2025-26
High-Fidelity Unmanned Multirotor Flight Dynamics Simulation  
for Off-Nominal Conditions LAR-19479-1
This innovation is a six degree-of-freedom modeling and simulation architecture and database for predicting 
the flight dynamics behavior of small/medium sized multirotor vehicles in off-nominal and/or extreme out-of-
envelope conditions. The development of this technology was motivated by ongoing efforts to integrate 
small uncrewed aircraft system (sUAS) vehicles into the National Airspace System (NAS). These efforts 
include development of risk and safety analysis methods that will enable autonomous, beyond-visual-range 
operations and could include real-time flight monitoring systems, trajectory prediction during off-nominal 
or failure scenarios, and probabilistic safety analyses. The modeling and simulation architecture comprises 
aerodynamic and propulsion models that are valid for all-attitude flight conditions such as extreme relative 
wind angles (e.g. high angle of attack and sideslip angles), very high vehicle angular rates typical of loss-of-
control events, vortex ring state conditions, and onboard system or component failures. The aerodynamic 
and propulsion models are derived using specialized wind tunnel test methods that replicate extreme 
off-nominal flight conditions.
U.S. Government Purpose Release
Higher-Fidelity Conceptual Design and Structural Optimization (HCDstruct), Version 2.0 LAR-18901-1
HCDstruct now includes an aerostructural modeling and optimization capability for generalized tube and 
wing aircraft configurations. This tool permits the rapid, parameterized creation of aeroservoelastic finite- 
element models for general tube and wing aircraft configurations and constructs all files required to perform 
the subsequent aerostructural optimization using NASTRAN software. The methods employed offer a 
novel physics-based sizing capability for unconventional aircraft configurations for conceptual design 
environments.
U.S. Release Only
Higher-Order Design Environment (HOrDE): A Geometry-Centric, Multi-Disciplinary,  
Multi-Fidelity Process for Conceptual Aircraft Analysis and Design LAR-19572-1
The purpose of this software is to facilitate the creation of analysis and design processes for conceptual-
level aircraft configurations. At its core, the software contains a set of Java classes for defining the 
geometry, handling the analysis data associated with the geometry, executing external analysis methods, 
and pre- and post-processing analysis results. Users of the software can use the API to create wrappers 
for their own analysis methods, and to use both built-in and custom wrappers to create their own process 
models for the analysis and design processes used by their organization.
U.S. and Foreign Release
HyperSolve, Version 1.0 LAR-20542-1
HyperSolve is an unstructured grid CFD solver, specializing in the simulation of hypersonic flows.
U.S. Release Only
HyperSolve AD Mini-App LAR-19476-1
This is an in-house developed AD tool that is based on operator-overloading to compute linearizations of a 
given function.
Open Source
=====PAGE 19=====
10
Aeronautics
NASA Technology Transfer Program  Software Catalog 2025-26
Hypersonic Aerothermodynamics Particle (HAP) Code LEW-20319-1
The Hypersonic Aerothermodynamics Particle (HAP) code is a software tool for numerical simulation of 
high-speed gas flows, using shared memory parallelization and dynamically adaptive Cartesian grids. 
HAP is a framework built around the direct simulation Monte Carlo (DSMC) method, which is a stochastic 
technique for simulation of gas flows involving strong nonequilibrium among translational and/or internal 
(rotational, vibrational, and electronic) energy modes. Unique features of HAP include capabilities for hybrid 
or multiscale simulation of mixed rarefied/continuum flows, as well as integrated capabilities for design 
optimization, uncertainty quantification and global sensitivity analysis.
U.S. Government Purpose Release
Improved Human Ear AuRal Detection Implementation Tool (IHEARDIT) LAR-19879-1
The Improved Human Ear AuRal Detection Implementation Tool (IHEARDIT) determines the ability for the 
average human to detect a tonally dominated signal in a given background noise. The software compares 
the input signal at a human receiver location, and background noise level at that location. It models the 
auditory response, including filtering, internal noise, and signal detection theory to predict human audibility.
U.S. Government Purpose Release
Integrated Ground Risk Assessment Service Provider for Unmanned Aircraft Systems LAR-20284-1
The Integrated Ground Risk Assessment Service Provider tool is aimed to assess the aircraft’s integrated 
air and ground risk; namely, the mid-air collision risk and the ground casualty risks. Currently, the tool has 
access to high-resolution population density data, commercially available weather forecasting service, and 
sets of physical models to compute and visualize ground risks, assisting operators with pre-flight planning. 
As part of the ongoing work, the tool will leverage published notices to airmen (NOTAMs), Drone NOTAMs 
(DROTAMs), and an existing GPS availability prediction tool. With these data sources, and the intentional 
extensibility to add others, the capability will allow operators to develop flight plans that minimize ground 
casualty risk before an aircraft ever takes flight. 
U.S. Release Only
Inverse Heat Conduction Solver Using MATLAB (IHC Solve) LAR-18924-1
This MATLAB software reads in temperature data measured from two thermocouples embedded in a heat-
conducting specimen. The software then reads in the thermophysical properties for the heat-conducting 
specimen. After filtering noise from the measured temperature data, IHC Solve uses the filtered data and 
thermophysical properties to solve both a direct and inverse heat conduction problem to estimate both 
temperature and heat flux on the external surface of the specimen.
U.S. Government Purpose Release
Langley Stability and Transition Analysis Code (LASTRAC) LAR-16260-1
LASTRAC is a C++ code that analyzes compressible boundary-layer stability and performs transition 
prediction using the state-of-the-art Linear Stability Theory (LST) or Parabolized Stability Equations (PSE) 
methods.
U.S. Release Only
=====PAGE 20=====
11
Aeronautics
NASA Technology Transfer Program  Software Catalog 2025-26
Langley Stability and Transition Analysis Code (LASTRAC) Version 3.0 L AR-19464-1
LASTRAC3.0 is the first US release of the LASTRAC series of software for chemically reacting flows.  The 
code is designed to be backward compatible to the original LASTRAC release since 2004.  Users of the 
original release are strongly encouraged to upgrade to LASTRAC3.0 as the new software has improved 
functionality and new Python utility scripts are available for either perfect or reacting gas applications. 
In short, LASTRAC3.0 can handle boundary layers or shear layers with perfect, equilibrium, chemical 
nonequilibrium, or thermal nonequilibrium (two-temperature) chemistry effects. Users can choose between 
the default publicly available widely-used five-species air and any user-defined chemistry compositions/
models in a table or dynamically-linked-library format.  Solution methods allowed for the user-provided 
perfect or reacting mean flows include Linear Stability Theory (LST), linear/nonlinear Parabolized Stability 
Equations (PSE) for 2D/axisymmetric/infinite swept wing, or full 3D boundary layers. Nonlinear PSE 
functionalities in this release is restricted to perfect gases only.  Future release will include that for  
reacting flows.
U.S. Government Purpose Release
Langley Aerothermodynamic Upwind Relaxation Algorithm (LAURA), Version 5.6 L AR-19734-1
The Langley Aerothermodynamic Upwind Relaxation Algorithm (LAURA) has been updated to version 5.6. 
This is a computational fluid dynamics simulation software code. The new technologies regard techniques 
for modifying the computational grid, for modeling rough walls, and for interpreting simulations that 
incorporate a shock layer radiation model.
U.S. Release Only
Loudness Code for Asymmetric Sonic Booms (LCASB) L AR-16954-1
LCASB is a computer code to calculate the loudness of a sonic boom time history. Calculations of several 
noise metrics are provided. The code can calculate the loudness of the front and back parts of the sonic 
boom separately.
U.S. Release Only
Macro for an Apriori Grid NUmerics Metric (MAGNUM) L AR-17662-1
The Macro for an Apriori Grid NUmeric Metric (MAGNUM) software is a Tecplot macro that computes a grid 
quality metric, or number, for structured surface and volume grids that identifies how good the grid is for 
computational science applications. A good measure ranges from 0.7 to 1.0, where 0.7 is acceptable and 
1.0 is excellent quality. See AIAA paper 2004-0612 for additional information.
U.S. Release Only
Mesh_Tools:  
Automated Unstructured Grid Shock Fitting Scripts Mesh Extrusion for CFD M SC-26648-1
This is a collection of tools and scripts that create shock-fitted unstructured grids in a mostly automatic 
manner, similar to those created for structured grids. The scripts have been tested with several unstructured 
grid solvers, LociCHEM, FUN3D, and US3D, and can be made to work with most other unstructured CFD 
solvers. The script help to improve numerical stability and convergence when solving hypersonic cases with 
unstructured CFD solvers.   
U.S. Release Only
MFSim: Multi-Fidelity Simulation A RC-17449-1
MFS (Multi-Fidelity Simulator) is a pluggable framework for creating an air traffic flow simulator at multiple 
levels of fidelity. The framework is designed to allow low-fidelity simulations of the entire U.S. Airspace to be 
completed very quickly (on the order of seconds). The framework allows higher-fidelity plugins to be added 
to allow higher-fidelity simulations to occur in certain regions of the airspace concurrently with the low- 
fidelity simulation of the full airspace.
Open Source
=====PAGE 21=====
12
Aeronautics
NASA Technology Transfer Program  Software Catalog 2025-26
Mixed-Element USM3D Flow Solver for NASA TetrUSS LAR-19841-1
The NASA Tetrahedral Unstructured Software System (TetrUSS) has served as a reliable computational 
aerodynamic analysis tool for government and industry for over two decades. TetrUSS has twice won the 
NASA Software of the Year Award, in 1996 and 2004. The legacy Navier-Stokes flow solver within TetrUSS, 
USM3D, is based on fully tetrahedral cell-centered discretization. The present work extends the solver 
capability to handle mixed-element grids composed of hexahedral, prismatic, pyramidal, and tetrahedral 
cells. Furthermore, additional algorithmic capabilities have been implemented that significantly improve 
its robustness and time to solution. These changes were so extensive that an entirely new code has been 
written.
U.S. Release Only
Mode Shape Interpolation via Radial Basis Functions (RBF) LAR-19607-1
Preprocessing software to prepare a finite element structural model for use with the modal structural solver 
within the FUN3D CFD code. Mode shapes are interpolated from a NASTRAN FEM to the FUN3D CFD 
surface mesh.
Open Source
Mphys: Library for Coupling High Fidelity Codes in OpenMDAO LEW-20246-1
This is a modular multi-physics coupling library, built on OpenMDAO, for use with design optimization. This 
software can compute coupled analytic derivatives for multi-physics models built from a series of PDE 
solvers, for applications such as aeropropulsive, aerothermal, or aerostructural design.
Open Source
Modified Vortex Lattice (MVL-15) LAR-18774-1
MVL-15 is a Modified Vortex-Lattice (MVL) aerodynamics analysis code. The primary modification is the 
incorporation and assignment of viscous aerodynamics data associated with the wing section geometry to 
the inviscid vortex-lattice solution via iterative computational procedures. The strategy essentially converts 
an inviscid and purely analytic linearized method to a semi-empirical blend that retains the rapid execution 
speed of the linearized method while empirically characterizing the viscous aerodynamics at all spanwise 
lattice points. For the analysis of airplane configurations consisting of more than one wing, the resulting 
spanwise section aerodynamics can be integrated to determine the aerodynamics of each wing, both  
separately and combined. As implemented, the methodology inherently provides the capability to determine 
the non-linear viscous effects on lift and drag at relatively high angles of attack to identify the maximum  
lift coefficient and characterize the onset of stall. 
U.S. Release Only
Multi-Level Monte Carlo with Python (MLMCPy) LAR-19515-1
This code was written in Python to solve uncertainty propagation problems. Multi-level Monte Carlo (MLMC) 
is an efficient alternative to standard Monte Carlo simulation for estimating expectations of outputs to 
computational models with uncertain input parameters. MLMC greatly reduces computational cost by 
performing most simulations with low accuracy at a correspondingly low cost, with relatively few simulations 
being performed at high accuracy and high cost.
Open Source
Multiphysics Algorithm with Particles (MAP) LAR-18801-1
MAP is a multidimensional adaptive Cartesian implementation of the direct simulation Monte Carlo (DSMC) 
method with parallelization capabilities using MPI. The DSMC method is widely used for modeling of gas 
flows through the computation of motion and collisions of representative molecules. The software achieves 
a quality solution with minimal user input and control by performing dynamic adaptations of the grid, local 
time step, and surface temperature. 
U.S. Release Only
=====PAGE 22=====
13
Aeronautics
NASA Technology Transfer Program  Software Catalog 2025-26
NASA Design and Analysis of Rotorcraft (NDARC) ARC-16265-1
NDARC software is an aircraft system analysis tool that supports both conceptual design efforts and 
technology impact assessments of rotorcraft that meet specified requirements. The architecture of the 
NDARC code accommodates configuration flexibility, a hierarchy of models, and ultimately multidisciplinary 
design, analysis, and optimization.
U.S. Release Only
“NASA Glenn Research Center: The Early Years” for iPad LEW-18993-1
This application contains imagery and descriptions from the Glenn Research Center image archive. Photos 
and data cover the period from 1941–1979. The software has been compiled and bundled as an iOS app for 
the iPad and intended for release through the Apple App Store.
Open Source
NASA Internships App MSC-26652-1
The app was created using free app development software from glideapps.com. The information in the 
app was collected from public domains using google, nasa.gov public sites, Wikipedia, and YouTube. It 
is a repository of information so that students can learn about NASA, it’s mission, where the Centers are 
located, how they can connect NASA internships on social media platforms, and answer frequently asked 
questions about NASA internships.
General Public Release
NASA World Wind Java (WWJ) Software Development Kit (SDK), Version 2.2 ARC-15166-1E
A free software development kit (SDK) for assisting developers in the creation of geographical information 
systems (GISs). Common use cases for the WorldWind SDK are monitoring weather patterns, visualizing 
cities and terrain, tracking ground vehicles, analyzing geospatial data, flight tracking, satellite tracking and 
geographical education.
Open Source
OpenMDAO V2 LEW-19994-1
This is a high-performance computing platform for systems analysis and multidisciplinary optimization, 
written in Python. It enables you to decompose your models, making them easier to build and maintain, 
while still solving them in a tightly coupled manner with efficient parallel numerical methods.
Open Source
Operating System Abstraction Layer GSC-18370-1
The OS Abstraction Layer (OSAL) project is a small software library that isolates embedded software from 
the underlying operating system. The OSAL does this by providing an Application Program Interface (API) 
to an abstract real time operating system. The OSAL then provides implementations of this API for two 
Real Time Operating Systems: vxWorks and RTEMS. In addition, an implementation is provided for Linux/
POSIX for embedded Linux projects, and desktop development and testing. To facilitate the use of these 
APIs, the project also includes a directory structure and set of makefiles that facilitate building a project for a 
particular OS and hardware platform. Unit tests and several examples are included.
Open Source
=====PAGE 23=====
14
Aeronautics
NASA Technology Transfer Program  Software Catalog 2025-26
Optimal Trajectories by Implicit Simulation (OTIS), Version 5.0 LEW-20403-1
Optimal Trajectories by Implicit Simulation, Version 5.0 (OTIS5) is a reworking of the OTIS trajectory 
optimization software development. OTIS5 is a general purpose three degree-of freedom (DOF) trajectory 
simulation and optimization software package that is focused on the optimization of aerospace vehicle 
trajectories and associated vehicle design parameters. OTIS5 retains most of the functionality of the 
previous version but does not contain computer code subject to International Traffic in Arms Regulations 
(ITAR) restrictions. In addition, the new software will be distributed without the need for recompilation, 
making for an easier distribution process while also retaining code integrity through this (form of distribution) 
software control measure.
U.S. Release Only
Orbit-Determination Toolbox GSC-15728-1
Based on MATLAB and Java, the flexible Orbit-Determination Toolbox is intended primarily for the advanced 
mission analysis that might be performed in the concept exploration, proposal, and early design phases. 
Open Source
Orion Optical Navigation Image Processing Software, Version 1.5 MSC-27122-1
The Orion emergency return system utilizing optical navigation has matured in design over the last 
several years, and this second revision is currently undergoing the final implementation and test phase 
in preparation for Exploration Mission 2 (EM-2).  A key component is this software, which processes the 
images and produces navigation measurements and attitude measurements. The software development is 
being worked as a Government Furnished Equipment (GFE) project delivered as an application within the 
Core Flight Software of the Orion camera controller module.
U.S. Release Only
OVERFLOW: Overset Grid Computational Fluid Dynamics Flow Solver  
with Moving Body Capability, Version 2.4 LAR-20095-1
OVERFLOW 2.4 is a computer code for simulating viscous, compressible fluid flow about complex 
aerodynamic configurations. The technology solves the Reynolds-averaged Navier-Stokes equations using 
structured, overset computational grids. It includes the capability for simulating multiple moving bodies
acting under prescribed or aerodynamically forced motion. OVERFLOW 2 is a merge of the previously 
developed OVERFLOW 1.8 and OVERFLOW-D codes.
U.S. Release Only
Ozone: Ordinary Differential Equation and Optimal Control Solver LEW-19703-1
Ozone is a Python software package that facilitates the solution of ordinary differential equations (ODEs) 
and optimal control problems. It is unique among similar libraries because of its capability to compute 
derivatives of the ODE-integrated outputs with respect to parameters, initial conditions, and time interval. 
The software allows Ozone-based ODE models to be integrated into larger, potentially multidisciplinary 
models while using adjoint-type methods to compute derivatives for the larger model. In terms of the ODE 
integration, Ozone adopts the general linear methods (GLM) equations, allowing it to easily support a large 
library of Runge-Kutta and linear multistep methods. Ozone also supports multiple integration formulations 
consisting of time-marching, solver-based, and optimizer-based approaches to solving the ODE. Ozone is 
built on top of NASAs OpenMDAO software framework.
Open Source
Parallel Dantzig-Wolfe Decomposition ARC-16432-1
This implementation of the Dantzig-Wolfe decomposition is built upon the GNU Linear Programming Kit.  
The technology provides a command-line tool for solving properly decomposed linear programs.
Open Source
=====PAGE 24=====
15
Aeronautics
NASA Technology Transfer Program  Software Catalog 2025-26
PCBoom, Version 6 LAR-19926-1 
PCBoom 7.3.0 is a sonic boom propagation suite of programs that applies a full three-dimensional ray 
tracing based on geometrical acoustics in real atmospheres. It has a very efficient Burgers solver used to 
predict sonic boom ground waveforms and footprints from supersonic flight vehicles performing arbitrary 
maneuvers. It also computes loudness metrics and ground signature locations,  with algorithms on 
turbulence effects.
U.S. and Foreign Release
Pegasus 5.2: Software for Automated Pre-Processing of Overset CFD Grids ARC-15117-1A
The Pegasus software is used as a pre-processor for overset-grid computational fluid dynamics (CFD)  
simulations. It provides the hole-cutting and connectivity information between structured overset grids.  
The main features of the software include automated hole-cutting algorithms, a projection scheme for fixing 
small discretization errors in overset surface; efficient interpolation search methods; hole-size optimization 
based on adding additional layers of fringe points; and an automatic restart capability. The code can run in 
parallel using the Message-Passing Interface (MPI) standard. The parallel performance provides efficient 
speed-up of the execution time utilizing dozens or even hundreds of processors. Additional capabilities in 
version 5.2 include: support for cell-centered grids; a triple-fringe option; automated domain decomposition 
into multiple hole-cutters; an improved parallel execution load-balancing algorithm; and additional minor 
enhancements.
U.S. Release Only
PLOT3D, Version 4.1 ARC-14400-1
PLOT3D is a computer graphics program designed to visualize the grid and solutions of structured 
computational fluid dynamics (CFD) datasets. Version 4.1 uses the OpenGL/GLUT graphics library. Several 
new features have been added to the code. These include: automatic computation of grid coordinate 
minimum/maximum; an orphan point plotting function; the ability to read double-precision unformatted 
data; negative grid index processing; random specification of colors for different walls; and simultaneous 
specification of walls and subsets for all zones.
U.S. Release Only
PLOT3D Preprocessing and Postprocessing Libraries in Julia and Python LEW-20282-1
PLOT3D is a widely used format for storing grid data for numerical computation particularly in CFD. This 
free open-source python library enables researchers to have programmatic access to read, write, combine, 
PLOT3D files to build a 3D domain. One of the main challenges with simulations using PLOT3D is finding 
the connection of blocks of I,J,K indexing representing X,Y,Z coordinates in space. This tool contains 
functionality to automatically find matching faces of each block and exports the results as a human readable 
dictionary or JSON format.
Open Source
PRECiSA with Instrumented Code Generation LAR-19739-1
PRECiSA (Program Round-off Certifier via Static Analysis) is a fully automatic static analyzer for floating-
point valued functions. It computes an over-approximation of the round-off error of a given floating-point 
expression, along with a formal certificate that ensures the correctness of the estimated error.
Open Source
PyTurbo: A Python Framework for Aero-Thermal Gas Turbine Component Design LEW-20175-1
This is a NASA Turbomachinery design tool capable of going from a 2D Airfoil Design to a 3D design 
of a blade and a blade row. This design tool can wrap heatpipe paths inside the airfoil. PyTurbo is a 
turbomachinery design tool focused on the development of 3D blade rows consisting of 3D Airfoils. This 
enables fundamental research into transition, tip leakage passive flow control, cavity flows, and nature 
inspired shapes.
U.S. Government Purpose Release
=====PAGE 25=====
16
Aeronautics
NASA Technology Transfer Program  Software Catalog 2025-26
Quad-Channel Transport Class Model Simulation (Quad TCM) DRC-014-004
Quad TCM is a non-proprietary, non-sensitive aircraft Simulink model derived from Langley Research 
Center’s Transport Class Model (TCM). Quad TCM is a flight control system (FCS) oriented simulation  
with multi-channel (FCS) components, including flight control computers (FCCs), sensors, actuators,  
and interconnects. 
General Public Release
Runtime for Airspace Concept Evaluation (RACE) ARC-17749-1
RACE is a software architecture and framework for configurable, highly concurrent, and distributed 
message-based systems. It can be used to rapidly build simulations that span several machines (including 
synchronized displays), interface existing hardware simulators and other live data feeds, and incorporate 
sophisticated visualization components such as NASA’s WorldWind viewer. RACE is implemented as a 
distributed actor system that runs within Java virtual machines.
Open Source
RCOTOOLS: Rotorcraft Optimization Tools ARC-18184-1
RCOTOOLS provides utilities and application wrappers for the conceptual design of rotorcraft using an 
optimization framework. It currently has application wrappers for NDARC (NASA Design and Analysis of 
RotorCraft), CAMRAD II (Comprehensive Analytical Model of Rotorcraft Aerodynamics and Dynamics 
II), NPSS (Numerical Propulsion System Simulation), IXGEN (Intelligent Cross-section Generator) and 
CHARM (Comprehensive Hierarchical Aeromechanics Rotorcraft Model). These wrappers can be used 
independently or within an optimization using NASA’s OpenMDAO optimization framework.
U.S. and Foreign Release
Real-Time Background Oriented Schlieren Software Package Update, 2022 LEW-20407-1
Background Oriented Schlieren (BOS) is an optical technique for measuring density gradients in flow fields, 
in quiescent air or even liquids. Advances in computer processing hardware enable the implementation 
of real-time processing and display of the BOS image data. Two different approaches to implementing 
the real-time BOS (RT-BOS) processing capability have been implemented. First, a traditional multicore 
central processing unit (CPU) based approach using scheduled parallel threads is used to build a RT-BOS 
processing engine. In the second approach, a graphical processing unit approach is used to construct a 
RT-BOS processing engine. Generally, high-core count CPU processors can provide a useful processing 
rate for RT-BOS.
U.S. Release Only
sBOOM: An Advanced Sonic Boom Propagation Tool LAR-20310-1
Very useful in the development of supersonic cruise aircraft, this NASA-developed propagation tool predicts 
sonic-boom ground signatures by numerically solving the Augmented Burgers equation. Efficient and 
accurate, sBoom can predict shock thicknesses, thereby improving the frequency spectrum of ground 
signatures. Because shock rise times are computed and not empirically adjusted or corrected, the tool 
affords more accurate loudness calculations than comparable linear-theory methods.
General Public Release
sBOOM2: An Advanced Sonic Boom Propagation and Design Tool LAR-20309-1
This innovation presents an approach to not only predict sonic boom ground signatures by numerically 
solving the Augmented Burgers’ equation, but it also allows the crucial step of efficiently computing the 
sensitivities of various sonic boom metrics, both at the ground level and mid-field levels with respect to the 
aircraft outer mold line parameters. This unique new functionality represents a major milestone in sonic 
boom mitigation literature and offers a game-changing design methodology for commercial supersonic 
aircraft design.
U.S. Release Only
=====PAGE 26=====
17
Aeronautics
NASA Technology Transfer Program  Software Catalog 2025-26
Sector 33 App ARC-16853-1
Offering a single user interface, Sector 33 is an air traffic control simulator game for Apple and Droid mobile 
devices. The technology includes introductory videos, an interactive air traffic control simulation of up to five 
airplanes, problem scoring, and integrated solution hints. 
General Public Release
Shape Parameterization Algorithm (MASSOUD) LAR-15968-1
The MASSOUD and/or Bandaids software packages are geometry parameterization tools that may be used 
to perform design optimization with NASA’s FUN3D and other CFD codes.
U.S. Release Only
SMS/SDSS STBO Data Fuser ARC-17917-1
This is a mechanism that combines multiple sources of air traffic, airline, and airport data that contain many 
overlapping or similar types of data and creates a unified set of data that can be used for Surface Trajectory 
Based Operations (STBO) air traffic management systems.
Open Source
SolFlyte LAR-18203-1
SolFlyte enables the analysis of solar-electric (SE) HALE aircraft and airship concepts and missions 
by uniquely modeling the complex interactions of time-dependent astronomical, geographical, and 
atmospheric factors on key metrics such as energy balance, shadowing, performance, on-site persistence, 
and design size. Separate functional utilities are linked using the PHX ModelCenter v9.0 integration 
framework to create the SolFlyte-HTA (airplane), SolFlyte-LTA (airship) analysis models, and the SolFlyte-
WND wind data processing model. The flexible inputs and rapid execution of the SolFlyte models broaden 
the analysis scope and permit parametric design feedback.
General Public Release
Static Loader Library for Real-Time Embedded Systems GSC-17810-1
The Static Loader Library for Real-Time Embedded Systems is a small software library written in the C 
programming language designed to allow individual software components to be linked to a specific memory 
location and loaded from an embedded file system. It is used as a lightweight replacement for the dynamic 
loader provided in many operating systems.
U.S. Government Purpose Release
StormGen Weather Editor ARC-16827-1
The StormGen interactive editor facilitates the design and production of dynamic convective weather 
scenarios. The software exports weather data in formats compatible with widely used air- and ground-tool 
simulators.
U.S. Release Only
SUITCASE Structural Analysis and Optimization System LAR-20078-1
SUITCASE is a Fortran computer code that performs static structural analysis, static aeroelastic loads 
analysis, aircraft trim, dynamic structural analysis, flutter analysis, and structural optimization. For structural 
analysis, SUITCASE calls the external program EPSM (Equivalent Plate Structural Modeling), and for flutter 
analysis, SUITCASE calls the external program DLFLUT. All other analysis tools are contained within the 
SUITCASE system. For optimization, SUITCASE uses the KSOPT optimizer and the LPSOLVE optimizer.
General Public Release
=====PAGE 27=====
18
Aeronautics
NASA Technology Transfer Program  Software Catalog 2025-26
SUPKEM ARC-16260-1
SUMKEM is fully implicit, parabolic, partial-differential equation solver that can be used for the integration of 
unsteady 3D turbulence kinetic energy and dissipation-rate equations. The technology enables any laminar 
computational fluid dynamics (CFD) solver to compute a given unsteady turbulent flow of interest.
U.S. Government Purpose Release
Support Libraries for Cart3D I/O Functions and Extensible Design Description Markup ARC-18778-1
This is a collection of software libraries used for various I/O functions of the Cart3D aerodynamic analysis 
and optimization package. This includes reading and writing surface triangulation files, volume mesh files 
and files for aerodynamic shape optimization problems.
Open Source
Surface Operations Simulator and Scheduler (SOSS)  ARC-16808-1A
A simulation of air traffic movement on an airport surface, SOSS can be used in developing, analyzing, and 
testing runway schedulers and resolution algorithms.
U.S. Government Purpose Release
TLNS3D LAR-16666-GS
This software was developed to solve Reynolds-averaged Navier-Stokes equations to simulate turbulent, 
viscous flows over three-dimensional configurations. A general multiblock grid is used to model complex 
configurations. A multi-stage Runge-Kutta pseudo-time stepping scheme is coupled with residual 
smoothing and multigrid acceleration techniques to form an efficient algorithm. TLNS3D-MB was the 
first CFD code to demonstrate grid-independent convergence rate for transonic viscous flows over wing/
fuselage configurations.
Open Source
Tool for Turbine Engine Closed-Loop Transient Analysis (TTECTrA) LEW-19177-1
TTECTrA is a tool, developed in the MATLAB/Simulink environment, intended to extend systems analysis 
by providing an estimate of the transient performance/capability of a conceptual engine design. The 
software is capable of designing a basic turbofan engine controller, with transient protection, based on 
the user’s engine model and constraints. TTECTrA is built in the Mathworks Matlab/Simulink environment 
and relies on the Matlab Control Systems Toolbox to provide additional functionality and streamline the 
control design process.
Open Source
Traffic Situation Display (TSD) ARC-16063-1A
The Traffic Situation Display (TSD) is an integrated display of air traffic, weather, terrain, and special-use 
airspace. TSD was designed to serve as a primary graphical interface for ground operators/dispatchers 
supporting research simulation of single-pilot and/or reduced-crew operations. One key feature is the 
seamless transitional flow between the ego-referenced and position-referenced frames.
U.S. Government Purpose Release
Trajectory-Based Route Analysis and Control (TRAC) ARC-16433-1
TRAC is an extensible software platform that supports next-generation air traffic concept investigations. The 
software enables visualization of current-day airspace elements; graphical creation of new elements; and 
runway-to-runway agent-based simulation and analysis of air traffic concepts.
U.S. and Foreign Release
=====PAGE 28=====
19
Aeronautics
NASA Technology Transfer Program  Software Catalog 2025-26
TURBO-AE: An Aeroelastic and Multi-Stage Aerodynamic Analysis Code  
Based on Unsteady Three-Dimensional Navier-Stokes Equations LEW-17514-1
An aeroelastic and unsteady aerodynamic analysis code has been developed for prediction of flutter, 
forced response, performance, and rotor-stator interaction effects. The analysis provides a high-fidelity 
modeling of subsonic, transonic, and supersonic flow regimes with attached and separated flow fields. The 
code calculates performance quantities such as efficiency, mass flow, pressure ratio, temperature ratio, 
distribution of flowfield properties in the entire domain of calculation, aerodynamic damping to assess flutter 
stability and unsteady aerodynamic forces arising from rotor-stator interaction for calculation of forced 
response. This information can be used in high-cycle fatigue analysis of blade rows.
U.S. Release Only
Two-Dimensional/Axisymmetric Nozzle Design Code  
Using the Irrotational Method of Characteristics (IMOCND) LAR-16744-1
A program which can be used to design two-dimensional or axisymmetric nozzles having uniform or 
non-uniform (Mach number and/or flow angle) supersonic inflow. If possible, the computer program 
generates a nozzle contour which produces supersonic, shock-free, uniform flow at the nozzle exit. It also 
gives the user control over the geometry at inflow and in the expansion region of the nozzle.
U.S. Release Only 
Upwind Parabolized Navier-Stokes Solver (UPS) for Supersonic  
and Hypersonic Flow Simulation, Version 6.1 ARC-15250-1
This software provides a means for simulating supersonic and hypersonic flows efficiently and accurately 
(under certain restrictions). The parabolized Navier-Stokes (PNS) equations are solved using an upwind 
finite-volume algorithm that is implicit in the marching direction. The solver includes models for turbulent 
flow and equilibrium-rate and finite-rate air chemistry.
U.S. Release Only
View2space: A Tool for Computing View Factors to Space for CFD Grids MSC-27263-1
The standard radiation equilibrium boundary condition used for computational fluid dynamics (CFD) 
simulations assumes a perfect view. In reality, surfaces within view of each other have a complex radiation 
interchange that need to be modeled to accurately capture the physics. The reduced view factor to space is 
simply the view of space visible from each face on the input CFD grid and varies from zero to one. The code 
models this by rendering a simple black and white image. The reduced view factor to space is computed by 
determining the percentage of black pixels (space) in the image. The view factors are then exported in a data 
file so that they can be used by a CFD code.
General Public Release
Volume Grid Manipulator (VGM) LAR-15703
This code is specifically designed to alter or manipulate existing surface and volume structured grids 
to improve grid quality through the reduction of grid line skewness, removal of negative volumes, and 
adaption of surface and volume grids to flow field gradients, to name a few applications. The software uses 
a command language to perform all manipulations thereby offering the capability of executing multiple 
manipulations on a single grid comprised of a single or multiple block set during an execution of the code. 
The command language can be input to the VGM code by a UNIX style redirected file, or interactively while 
the code is executing.
U.S. Release Only
=====PAGE 29=====
20
Aeronautics
NASA Technology Transfer Program  Software Catalog 2025-26
VULCAN-CFD L AR-18512-1
VULCAN-CFD offers a comprehensive set of capabilities to enable the simulation of continuum flowfields 
from subsonic to hypersonic conditions. The governing equations employed include allowances for both 
chemical and thermal non-equilibrium processes, coupled with a wide variety of turbulence models for 
both Reynolds-averaged and large-eddy simulations. The software package can simulate two-dimensional, 
axisymmetric, or three-dimensional problems on structured multi-block meshes or unstructured meshes.  
It also allows one to invoke a parabolic (i.e., space-marching) treatment for any subset of a problem that can 
accommodate this solution strategy. 
U.S. Release Only
WINGDES2: Wing Design and Analysis Code (WDES) L AR-13995-1
Wing-design algorithm based on modified linear theory taking into account effects of attainable leading-
edge thrust. Provides analysis as well as design capability and applicable to both subsonic and supersonic 
flow.
U.S. Release Only
X-Plane Communications Toolbox (XPC) A RC-17185-1
The X-Plane Communications Toolbox enables users to (1) receive real-time information on one or more 
simulated vehicle’s state from the X-Plane flight simulator and (2) control vehicles running in the X-Plane 
simulation environment. The toolbox can be used to record simulated flight data, visualize flight profiles, 
create out-the-window visuals, test autopilots, and test control algorithms. Additionally, the toolbox enables 
the display of ghost traffic flying predefined flight paths in the simulated airspace and the visualization of 
flight plans in the form of waypoints. 
Open Source
Zappy: Load Flow Modeling Tool for Power System Design  
with Gradient Based Optimization L EW-20150-1
Zappy is a software library build on top of the OpenMDAO framework written in the Python Programming 
language. It provides a modular software code enabling a user to perform standard power system studies, 
while also providing analytic derivative (sensitivity) calculations to the end user. These analytic derivatives 
make Zappy efficient when used by (or incorporated into) external software programs performing broader 
multidisciplinary optimization of electrical power systems.
Open Source
=====PAGE 30=====
2121
Autonomous Systems
Robotics, Automated Systems, Systems  
Health Monitoring 
For 2019’s third annual Swarmathon competition at the Kennedy Space Center Visitor Complex in Florida, 23 teams of 
students each programmed a team of small robots to autonomously cooperate in a search for “resources” in the form of 
AprilTag cubes like the one seen in this robot’s grip. Credit: NASA
21
=====PAGE 31=====
22
Autonomous Systems
NASA Technology Transfer Program  Software Catalog 2025-26
Featured Software
Smartphone Video Guidance Sensor (SVGS) MF S-33014-1
The Smartphone Video Guidance Sensor (SVGS) allows for calculation of the distance and orientation of 
an object relative to the SVGS. A known retroreflective target pattern is mounted on the target object. The 
retroreflectors are then illuminated by the camera flash on the smartphone and imaged by the smartphone 
camera. The resulting image is processed using photogrammetry algorithms running on the smartphone to 
extract the relative X, Y, and Z distance and relative orientation, expressed as a roll, pitch, yaw angle sequence.
U.S. Release Only
Activity Planning with Resources for the Exploration of Space (APRES) AR C-18869-1
Activity Planning with Resources for the Exploration of Space (APRES) is a mixed-initiative mission 
planning system for ground operations. APRES has a web-based user interface that is integrated with the 
Open-source Mission Control Technologies (OpenMCT) system and includes a plan editor, a timeline plan 
display, a temporal constraint editor, display of the state and numeric chronicles, and a mixed-initiative 
violation resolution manager. Automation support is supplied by the APRES Service. The APRES Service 
components are based on the Action Notation Modeling Language (ANML), a highly expressive, powerful 
language for specification of domain models. ANML enables the specification of an extensive variety of 
flight rules and resource usage. Integrated with the APRES system is a web-based ANML Editor for creating, 
editing, and debugging domain models. 
U.S. and Foreign Release
Hazards Analysis Management Tool (HAMT) GS C-16846-1
HAMT uses a single software tool to increase the efficiency and effectiveness of hazard analyses. 
Composed of a Microsoft Access front end (that contains the user interface) paired with a Microsoft 
Access back end (that stores analysis data), the software can be used to enter, edit, and report information 
throughout the hazard analysis lifecycle.
U.S. Government Purpose Release
22
=====PAGE 32=====
23
Autonomous Systems
NASA Technology Transfer Program  Software Catalog 2025-26
Activity Planning with Resources for the Exploration of Space (APRES) AR C-18869-1
Activity Planning with Resources for the Exploration of Space (APRES) is a mixed-initiative mission 
planning system for ground operations. APRES has a web-based user interface that is integrated with the 
Open-Source Mission Control Technologies (OpenMCT) system and includes a plan editor, a timeline plan 
display, a temporal constraint editor, display of the state and numeric chronicles, and a mixed-initiative 
violation resolution manager. Automation support is supplied by the APRES Service. The APRES Service 
components are based on the Action Notation Modeling Language (ANML) which is a highly expressive, 
powerful language for specification of domain models. Integrated with the APRES system is a web-based 
ANML Editor for creating, editing, and debugging domain models.  
U.S. And Foreign Release 
AprilNav: Indoor Real-time Landmark Navigation System MF S-33648-1
AprilNav uses printable 2D fiduciary markers, an HD camera, and software running on a single-board 
computer to create a scalable and accurate system for vehicular autonomous navigation and localization.
Open Source
Astrobee Robot Software (ARS) AR C-17994-1
Astrobee is a free-flying robot that is designed to operate as a payload inside the International Space Station 
(ISS). The Astrobee Robot Software (ARS) consists of the embedded (onboard) software and simulator. 
ARS operates on Astrobee’s three internal computers and uses the open-source Robot Operating System 
(ROS) framework to link multiple software modules. ARS performs localization and navigation of Astrobee, 
supports autonomous docking and perching, manages various sensors and actuators, and supports user 
interaction (via screen-based displays, light signaling, and sound). 
Open Source
Automation Framework Designed for Flight Dynamics Products Generation (XFDS) GS C-15618-1
This software framework automates the generation of flight dynamics products by providing a unified and 
consistent graphical interface to various tools. The technology coordinates the execution of applications 
such as Satellite ToolKit, FreeFlyer, and MATLAB; allows for the embedding of Perl code; provides a 
mechanism for passing messages between a collection of XFDS processes; and allows GMSEC messages 
to be sent and received. Automation configuration is stored in text files and can be edited directly or by 
using graphical editors implemented for each tool.
U.S. Government Purpose Release
Autonomous Operating System: Diagnostic Reasoner AR C-18051-1
Diagnostic Reasoner (DR) is a research tool which uses a dependency matrix (D-matrix) approach to 
perform diagnosis on a target system. It is an app designed to run with NASA’s Core Flight Software (cFS) 
system. DR uses a model-based approach to diagnosis and provides runtime fault detection and fault 
identification of systems.
Open Source
Autonomous Real-Time Requirements Tracing (ART) MF S-33209-1
This NASA software offers the ability to directly trace the real-time execution of software to specific 
requirements, a unique capability that can only be performed with a Timeliner-TLX system, as no other 
computer languages directly report this data during execution. The tracing feature does not impose input/
output requirements (e.g., print/write statements) on the targeted software because the tracing is performed 
by an outside program executing separately. The Timeliner-TLX language is currently used for auto-
procedures on the International Space Station (ISS) and the Autonomous Mission Operations (AMO) project, 
and future manned deep-space missions will require the use of extensive auto-procedures to assist in 
remote intelligent operations.
U.S. Government Purpose Release
=====PAGE 33=====
24
Autonomous Systems
NASA Technology Transfer Program  Software Catalog 2025-26
Bundle Protocol Library G SC-18318-1
The Bundle Protocol Library (bplib) implements a subset of the RFC5050 Bundle Protocol necessary for 
embedded space flight applications. The library uses the concept of a bundle channel to manage the 
process of encapsulating application data in bundles, and extracting application data out of bundles. A 
channel specifies how the bundles are created (e.g. primary block fields), and how bundles are processed. 
Bplib contains no threads and relies entirely on the calling application for its execution context, and 
implements a thread-safe synchronous I/O model where no call-backs are necessary and requested 
operations will either block according to the provided timeout, or return an error code immediately if the 
operation cannot be performed.
Open Source
Bundle Protocol Core Flight System Application (BP) G SC-18331-1
The BP cFS application uses the Bundle Protocol Library (bplib) to implement Delay Tolerant Networking. 
The application targets the cFE 6.5 release and provides out-of-the-box integration with the cFS CFDP 
application (CF), and a POSIX-compliant file system when provided. The implementation conforms to the 
CCSDS Blue Book recommendation 734.2-B-1 issued September 2015, which is based on RFC 5050.
U.S. Government Purpose Release
core Flight System (cFS) Stored Command Absolute (SCA) Application G SC-17537-1
This software is a core Flight System (cFS) application that allows a system to be autonomously 
commanded via files that contain sequences of commands. Each command has a time tag associated 
with it, permitting the command to be released for distribution over the cFS core Flight Executive (cFE) 
Software Bus at predetermined times. The application allows up to 5 absolute-time sequences to be run 
simultaneously.
Open Source
CORTEX: Continuous Optimization in Robotics via Test and Exploration N PO-52987-1
CORTEX is a sophisticated framework developed to revolutionize robotics engineering. It accelerates the 
development cycle by enabling quick prototyping in simulated environments and efficient deployment on 
real robots. CORTEX offers an extensive suite of tools for conducting experiments with precise control 
and repeatability. Its data management system, integrated with test automation capabilities, provides 
insightful analysis, aiding in the refinement of robotics algorithms. The framework’s modular design 
ensures compatibility with a broad spectrum of robotic systems, facilitating customization and extension 
according to specific project needs. These features provide a holistic view of robotics systems and 
enable streamlined knowledge transfer, enhanced decision making, and greater alignment amongst all 
stakeholders in robotics projects.
General Public Release
CRoss-Application Translator for Operational Unmanned Systems (CRATOUS) L AR-19533-1
CRATOUS is a software bridge that allows OpenUxAS to use some of the functionalities provided by the 
Independent Configurable Architecture for Reliable Operations of Unmanned Systems with Distributed 
On-board Services (ICAROUS)  software.
Open Source
Detect and Avoid Alerting Logic for Unmanned Systems (DAIDALUS)  
with Dynamic Well-Clear Separation Volumes L AR-19282-1
DAIDALUS is a software library that implements a detect-and-avoid concept for unmanned aircraft systems. 
Functionality provided by DAIDALUS includes: detection logic, maneuver guidance logic (e.g., loss of well-
clear recovery), and alerting logic. 
Open Source
=====PAGE 34=====
25
Autonomous Systems
NASA Technology Transfer Program  Software Catalog 2025-26
Extendable Uniform Remote Operations Planning Architecture (EUROPA), Version 2.1 A RC-15936-1
EUROPA is a general-purpose, reusable, artificial intelligence software system. The tool generates plans for 
performing complex activities in parallel. Functionality includes the capability of verifying that a plan satisfies 
all constraints. 
Open Source
Generic Software Architecture for Prognostics (GSAP) A RC-17748-1A
A generic, extendable, flexible, modular framework for applying prognostics technologies. GSAP manages 
top-level control, communications, logging, configuration, integration, and other general activities. A simple, 
standard interface is provided for integrating prognostics algorithms and models, minimizing the work 
required to deploy prognostics technologies.
Open Source
Hazards Analysis Management Tool (HAMT) G SC-16846-1
HAMT uses a single software tool to increase the efficiency and effectiveness of hazard analyses. 
Composed of a Microsoft Access front end (that contains the user interface) paired with a Microsoft 
Access back end (that stores analysis data), the software can be used to enter, edit, and report information 
throughout the hazard analysis lifecycle.
U.S. Government Purpose Release
Independent Configurable Architecture for Reliable Operations  
of Unmanned Systems with Distributed Onboard Services (ICAROUS-2)  L AR-19281-1
ICAROUS-2 enables the robust integration of mission-specific software modules and highly-assured 
core software modules for building autonomous unmanned aircraft applications. The core software 
modules are implemented as distributed onboard services that communicate using a publisher/subscriber 
communication layer. The ICAROUS-2 independent architecture provides support for integration with 
standard and open-source communication and computation layers, including Core Flight Systems (CFSs), 
Data Distribution Service (DDS), MAVLink, and Plan Execution Interchange Language (PLEXIL).
Open Source
Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL) Stereo Vision Software Suite (JPLV) N PO-18593-1T
JPLV provides a set of libraries and utilities for basic robotic vision, including stereo ranging and camera 
calibration. Primarily intended for vision system users rather than vision system developers, the suite hides 
most implementation details behind a high-level application user interface. No specialized computer-vision 
knowledge is required.
U.S. Government Purpose Release
Lidar-Based Hazard-Relative Navigation (HRN) Algorithm for Safe Lunar Landing N PO-47115-1
The purpose of HRN is to provide measurements to the navigation filter so that it can limit errors on the 
position estimate after hazards have been detected. Hazards are detected by processing a hazard digital 
elevation map (HDEM). The HRN process takes lidar images as the spacecraft descends to the surface and 
matches these to the HDEM to compute relative position measurements.
U.S. Government Purpose Release
Matlab Classes Implementing Geometric Algebra for Homogeneous  
Transformations of 3D Rigid Bodies in 4D Projective Space G SC-19268-1
A collection of Matlab classes implementing the Geometric Algebra G(3,0,1) for homogeneous 
transformations of 3D rigid bodies in 4D projective space, primarily based on Lengyal’s conventions.
Open Source
=====PAGE 35=====
26
Autonomous Systems
NASA Technology Transfer Program  Software Catalog 2025-26
MAV: Modeling, Analysis and Visualization of ATM Concepts A RC-17874-1
A modeling and analysis framework that provides the ability to model humans, automation, the 
interactions between humans and between humans and automation for air traffic management and 
airspace design concepts.
Open Source
Mission Analysis Low-Thrust Optimizer (MALTO) N PO-43625-1
MALTO is a software tool for preliminary design and optimization of low-thrust interplanetary trajectories. 
The tool is easy to use, has robust convergence, and can handle many intermediate encounters.
U.S. Government Purpose Release
Mission Simulation Toolkit (MST) A RC-14932-1
MST offers a simulation framework to support research in autonomy for remote exploration. The system 
allows developers to test models in a high-fidelity simulation and then evaluate system performance against 
a set of integrated, standardized simulations.
Open Source
Model-Based Diagnosis Engine for Stochastic Hybrid Systems (HyDE) A RC-15570-1A
HyDE is a model-based diagnostic engine capable of detecting and isolating discrete (possibly multiple) 
faults in physical systems. The current version of HyDE has been implemented in C++. U.S. Government 
Purpose Release
Mystic Low-Thrust Trajectory Design and Visualization Software N PO-43666-1
Mystic provides very high-fidelity optimization of low-thrust spacecraft trajectories for mission design. The 
software can be used for general body-centered trajectories, interplanetary trajectories, and trajectories that 
combine body-centered and interplanetary trajectory legs. Mystic will also provide navigational/operational 
support for low-thrust spacecraft.
U.S. Government Purpose Release
NASA Tensegrity Robotics Toolkit (NTRT), Version 1 A RC-17093-1
A collection of C++ and MATLAB software modules for the modeling, simulation, and control of Tensegrity 
Robots; a biologically inspired approach to building robots based on the tension networks of tensegrity 
structures. The NTRT was created to enable the rapid co-exploration of structures and controls in a 
physics-based simulation environment; the development of tensegrity robotics algorithms such as structural 
analysis, kinematics, and motion planning; and the validation of the algorithms and controls on hardware 
prototypes of the tensegrity robots.
Open Source
Ocean Worlds Autonomy Testbed for Exploration Research and Simulation A RC-18548-1
A simulation environment for research and development of on-board autonomy software for scientific lander 
missions to the ocean worlds of our solar system: the moons harboring large quantities of liquids, such as 
Europa, Enceladus, and Titan. The proposed “Europa Lander” mission was chosen as a reference design to 
inform the development of the simulator.
Open Source
Planetary Observer Planning Software (POPS) N PO-45418-1
The POPS application suite performs mission design analysis of a spacecraft orbiting a terrestrial planet. 
POPS is not intended for the study of hyperbolic or interplanetary orbits, although some limited hyperbolic 
capabilities exist.
U.S. Government Purpose Release
=====PAGE 36=====
27
Autonomous Systems
NASA Technology Transfer Program  Software Catalog 2025-26
PolyCARP: Algorithms and Software for Computations with Polygons  LA R-18798-1
PolyCARP is a package of algorithms, including both their formal models and software implementations, 
for computing containment, collision, resolution, and recovery information for polygons. The intended 
applications of PolyCARP are related, but not limited, to safety-critical systems in air traffic management. 
Algorithms center on weather avoidance, ensuring that an aircraft stays inside a predetermined safety 
region, and obstacle avoidance by an aircraft.
Open Source
Power Autonomy Research and Development Environment (PARDE) LE W-20190-1
PARDE is a version of NASA’s Autonomous Power Control (APC) software that can be used to evaluate fault 
management and automatic power system reconfiguration algorithms in a relevant system without having 
to fully develop all the supporting software. Software items included are a set of C++ class source files 
representing simplified fault management and reconfiguration logic, a power system simulation representing 
a notional architecture for NASA’s Gateway vehicle, a web-based graphical user interface for running and 
testing the simulation and APC, a Docker-based automatic setup script for a development environment, and 
a user’s guide.
U.S. Government Purpose Release
Prognostics Algorithm Library AR C-17735-1
The Prognostics Algorithm Library is a suite of algorithms implemented in the MATLAB programming 
language for model-based prognostics (remaining life computation). It includes algorithms for state 
estimation and prediction including uncertainty propagation. The algorithms take inputs component 
models developed in MATLAB and perform estimation and prediction functions. The library allows the rapid 
development of prognostics solutions for given models of components and systems. Different algorithms 
can be easily swapped to do comparative studies and evaluations of different algorithms to select the best 
for the application at hand.
Open Source
Prognostics Model Library AR C-17736-1
The Prognostics Model Library is a modeling framework focused on defining and building models for  
prognostics (computation of remaining useful life) of engineering systems It provides a set of models for 
select components developed within this framework. The library currently includes models for valves, 
pumps, and batteries. 
Open Source
PX4 Autopilot Simulink Interface LA R-19482-1
Simulink S-Function PX4 autopilot interface block. This software provides Simulink simulations with an 
interface to the PX4 autopilot. Enabling Simulink vehicle simulations to be controlled by the PX4 autopilot in 
simulated environments.
Open Source
Python Prognostics Algorithm Package AR C-18635-1
The Prognostic Algorithm Package is a python framework for prognostics (computation of remaining useful 
life) of engineering systems, and provides a set of prognostics algorithms for prognostics state estimation 
and prediction.
Open Source
Python Prognostics Model Package AR C-18634-1
The Prognostic Model Package is a python modeling framework focused on defining and building models 
for prognostics (computation of remaining useful life) of engineering systems, and provides a set of 
prognostics models for select components developed within this framework.
Open Source
=====PAGE 37=====
28
Autonomous Systems
NASA Technology Transfer Program  Software Catalog 2025-26
Robot Application Programming Interface Delegate (RAPID), Version 2 A RC-16368-1A
RAPID is a software reference implementation framework for remote operations. The technology promotes 
interoperability between robot software modules and includes a standard programming interface and data 
distribution middleware. RAPID facilitates integration of experimental robot software modules created by 
a distributed development team; improves the compatibility and reusability of robotic functions; and offers 
speed prototype robot development in a wide range of configurations and environments.
Open Source
ROSA Extension for Nvidia IsaacSim N PO-53324-1
The ROSA Extension for Nvidia IsaacSim integrates the ROSA framework into the IsaacSim simulation 
environment, providing users with a more intuitive way to control robotic simulations. By enabling natural 
language interaction directly within IsaacSim, this extension simplifies robot control and simulation 
management, bypassing the complexity of IsaacSim’s extensive set of controls and configurations. Users 
can now not only direct robot movements but also manage simulation workflows by starting, pausing, 
or stopping the simulation timeline via natural language commands. This integration enhances the user 
experience, allowing for more efficient robot development and simulation processes through intuitive, voice-
based control.
General Public Release
ROSA: Robot Operating System Agent NP O-53120-1
ROSA, the Robot Operating System Agent, is designed to address key challenges in modern robotics 
by simplifying interactions and improving communication across multidisciplinary teams. It achieves this 
through its innovative use of large language models (LLMs) which enable it to understand and process 
complex natural language queries about robotic systems. This functionality allows team members without 
specialized knowledge of ROS commands or the underlying technical structure to effectively interact with 
and manage robotic systems. ROSA’s ability to break down technical barriers and democratize access 
to sophisticated robotics technology enhances operational efficiency and reduces training requirements, 
thereby making robotics more accessible and easier to manage across various sectors.
General Public Release
Simple, Scalable, Script-Based Science Processor for Missions (S4PM) G SC-14841-1
S4PM is a set of Perl scripts that implement a data-driven processing system that executes science 
algorithms automatically as new data arrive. S4PM includes a graphical user interface for monitoring 
algorithms and the overall system for failures. The Perl scripts can currently process data from the Moderate 
Resolution Imaging Spectroradiometer and the Atmospheric Infrared Sounder, but the technology can be 
extended to process data from other missions if desired. 
Open Source
Small Body Navigation and Topography (SBN&T) N PO-41647-1
SBN&T provides an integrated program for the spacecraft navigation and determination of small-body 
dynamics, shape, and high-resolution topography. Multiple-image stereography and photoclinometry are 
used to construct high-resolution topographic and albedo maps centers treated as control points. These 
landmark maps are re-illuminated and correlated with images to act as body-fixed navigation tie-points.
U.S. Government Purpose Release
Smartphone Video Guidance Sensor (SVGS) M FS-33014-1
The Smartphone Video Guidance Sensor (SVGS) allows for calculation of the distance and orientation of 
an object relative to the SVGS. A known retroreflective target pattern is mounted on the target object. The 
retroreflectors are then illuminated by the camera flash on the smartphone and imaged by the smartphone 
camera. The resulting image is processed using photogrammetry algorithms running on the smartphone to 
extract the relative X, Y, and Z distance and relative orientation, expressed as a roll, pitch, yaw angle sequence.
U.S. Release Only
=====PAGE 38=====
29
Autonomous Systems
NASA Technology Transfer Program  Software Catalog 2025-26
WebGS: A Web-based Platform for Multi-UAV Flight Visualization and Simulation L AR-19641-1
As UAV traffic management development and testing has become more complicated, the need has 
arisen for tools that can control and visualize multi-vehicle interactions. WebGS is a tool for test design 
and automated simulation execution (repeatable and adjustable flight planning). It provides a platform for 
multi-aircraft interaction and visualization, and allows for live flights to interact with simulated vehicles. It is 
compatible with other flight control software and multiple aircraft simulators. Also, WebGS allows for remote 
monitoring and multi-user interactions. WebGS provides a platform to handle an increasingly complex and 
dynamic simulation and operational environments, while simplifying the user experience, and providing an 
easy to understand visual overview of a complex airspace environment.
Open Source
=====PAGE 39=====
3030
Business Systems  
and Project Management
Acquisitions, Business Processes, Property  
Management, Risk Management, Scheduling
30 30
Monica Manning, assistant administrator of NASA’s Office of Procurement, addresses a crowd of nearly 900 industry 
leaders from 33 states during the 29th Small Business Alliance meeting at Marshall Space Flight Center in Huntsville, 
Alabama, in February of 2020. Manning introduced a new model for managing mission support for the agency, with 
the intent to align and simplify processes. Credit: NASA
=====PAGE 40=====
Business Systems and Project Management
31
NASA Technology Transfer Program  Software Catalog 2025-26
Featured Software
Project Cost-Estimating Capability (PCEC) MFS -33187-2
Used to develop cost estimates/models for space systems, this technology combines an Excel add-in with a 
simple, robust, and transparent collection of NASA cost-estimating relationships, statistics, work breakdown 
structures, and cost-estimating algorithms. The use of native Excel functionality provides basic calculations, 
limits the overhead required to maintain a model, and affords more transparency to the user with regard to 
the calculations and equations involved in generating an estimate.
General Public Release
Schedule Test and Assessment Tool (STAT), Version 5.0 MFS -33362-1
STAT is a schedule management software add-in developed to work specifically within the Microsoft Project 
scheduling application. The software provides the automated capability to quickly identify, quantify, and 
report numerous types of critical schedule-assessment data for management use. Clear and objective 
reporting of key schedule-assessment information includes: logic network integrity indicators, performance 
and trend metrics, schedule driver identification, data comparisons, margin and milestone tracking, and 
various other analysis data that can be used by project teams to assist in decision-making. 
General Public Release
NASA Root Cause Analysis Tool (RCAT) LEW -19737-1
The NASA Root Cause Analysis Tool (RCAT) has been designed to facilitate the analysis of anomalies, close 
calls, and accidents and also identify the appropriate corrective actions to prevent recurrence. The software 
provides an analyst with a quick, easy-to-use, accurate, and repeatable method to perform and document 
root-cause analysis, identify corrective actions, perform trending analysis, and generate usable data for 
probabilistic risk assessment. All possible causes of accidents (hardware, software, the environment, 
weather, natural phenomena, external events, human error) can be incorporated into the timeline and fault/
causal factor trees. The software features an intuitive logic diagramming capability and uses standard  
terminology, definitions, and symbols.
U.S. and Foreign Release
31
=====PAGE 41=====
Business Systems and Project Management
32
NASA Technology Transfer Program  Software Catalog 2025-26
Action Item System, Version 2.0 GS C-16768-1
This Web application allows users to assign and track action items. Helpful emails are distributed when 
an action is created, updated, or closed, and reminder emails are sent to assignees when an action item 
deadline is approaching or has passed. 
U.S. Government Purpose Release
Application Information Logging Services (AILS) KS C-13992
AILS allows applications to log application events using a centralized set of services. Administrative and 
report functions are available to view logs.  
U.S. Government Purpose Release
Authorization Services (Authos) KS C-13984
Authos provides a suite of tools to authorize access to client applications. This includes application services 
and an end-user configuration module.
U.S. Government Purpose Release
Brahms: A Multiagent Simulation/Execution Environment  
for the Brahms Multiagent Language AR C-15654-1
Brahms is a multiagent programming language for modeling people and systems in a conceptual world. 
Brahms language gives users the ability to model the behavior of human organization, communication, and 
teamwork, as well as human-machine interaction.
U.S. Government Purpose Release
Calysto: Risk Management KS C-14485
The Calysto: Risk Management software application allows users to input risk data to their project or 
organization and ranks the risks by highest product of likelihood times highest consequence. Risks can be 
configured to require approval for them to be visible to general users, and to roll up to a parent organization. 
Other features include: retaining the history of a risk; automatic or manual trending to track the progress 
of a risk; export of risk data to Microsoft PowerPoint and Excel; tracking of risk mitigation tasks; automatic 
risk ID calculation; multiple views and reports of the risk data. The application is a SharePoint add-in in 
JavaScript, HTML, CSS, and CAML for on-premises program or online. It uses a SQL database to store 
content.
U.S. Release Only
Comments Export/Management Tool  MFS -33498-1
This tool is a collection of macros that enable a user to export Microsoft Word comments into a 
pre-formatted Excel spreadsheet, serving as an official record of the disposition for each comment. 
U.S. Government Purpose Release
Data Service Provider Cost-Estimation Tool (CET) and Comparables Database (CDB) GS C-14905-1
The Data Service Provider CET and CDB package provides NASA’s Earth Science Enterprise (ESE) the 
ability to make lifecycle cost estimates for the implementation and operation of the data service providers 
that are required to support its science and applications programs. The Data Service Provider CET and CDB 
package employs a cost-estimation-by-analogy approach. 
Open Source
eInfo Services (EIS) KS C-13991
EIS is a Web service used to provide employee information to Web applications. The tool is composed of an 
API service. Using this service, developers can create service calls within a given application, passing the 
established parameters to retrieve specific employee information as needed.
U.S. Government Purpose Release
=====PAGE 42=====
Business Systems and Project Management
33
NASA Technology Transfer Program  Software Catalog 2025-26
Employee Health and Safety System KS C-14081
This software was built to facilitate the process of employees completing their Health and Safety 
Requirements.Web application for supervisors to record their Work Center Safety and Health Guide 
progress. Application asks supervisors questions on all 22 sections of the document and records their 
answer for reports. Supervisors must complete this safety assessment annually and this application will 
facilitate the OSHA requirement. In addition, employees have the ability to certify they have completed their 
required training, JHA and certifications.
U.S. Government Purpose Release
HORIZON 5: Framework for Distributed Data Management  
and Product Generation Workflow NP O-49540-1
HORIZON 5 is an extensible framework for data management systems. It is packaged with SIP/AIP. 
Open Source
ID Digit Widget Plug-in LE W-19442-1
This plug-in utilizes the open API of MagicDraw and allows the user to manage and validate requirement IDs 
simply and effectively. The user can do single or mass prefix ID changes and/or renumbering and see the 
results before the changes are executed. The tool also performs requirement number validation, informing 
the user if a requirement ID is missing or duplicated and provides an opportunity to correct the issue.
U.S. Government Purpose Release
Kennedy Action Tracking System (KATS) KS C-13968
In the KATS application, a method of abstraction was used in a foundational Web site platform that 
liberated developers from the concern of having to manually generate entity framework calls to interact 
with the data layer of the application. The abstraction method/layer provided the ground work from that led 
to the development of a “project foundation” is the basic starting block for a wide variety of Web-based 
development. This foundation drastically reduces project spin-up time and standardizes data layer and other 
service interactions to ensure consistently high-performing transactional solutions.
U.S. Government Purpose Release
Mission Operations Cost-Estimation Tool (MOCET) LA R-18894-1
MOCET is a model developed by the Aerospace Corporation in partnership with NASA’s Science Office 
for Mission Assessment (SOMA). It implements new cost-estimating relationships (CERs) that were derived 
from historical data for various mission operation stages as applicable to the Planetary Science, Earth 
Science, and Astrophysics/Heliophysics Explorer missions.
General Public Release
NASA Aircraft Management Information System (NAMIS) MS C-24723-1
The NASA Aircraft Management Information System is an enterprise resource planning/mission support 
software suite designed from the ground up to meet both the mission support requirements and the 
business management requirements of Johnson Space Center’s Aircraft Operations Division (AOD). The 
system features tools and processes that: (1) eliminate the risk of conducting flight operations in aircraft with 
overdue inspections, in aircraft with grounding discrepancies, and in aircraft not properly configured for the 
mission; (2) provide continuous and positive control of all assets including materials, parts, and equipment 
that exceed a customer-defined value; and (3) reduce material costs and labor hours. NAMIS includes the 
data, information, and metrics required to support flight operations management and business decisions, 
as well as the data required by other systems and external components to support consistent and accurate 
financial reporting and asset accounting.
U.S. Government Purpose Release
=====PAGE 43=====
Business Systems and Project Management
34
NASA Technology Transfer Program  Software Catalog 2025-26
NASA Claims Authentication Provider KS C-14146
An authentication provider built for Microsoft SharePoint. The NASA Claims provider allows code to be 
executed once a user authenticates to a SharePoint site. Once a new token is created, events are triggered 
to add claims to the current user’s account using claims augmentation. Claims not available in part of 
the out of the box functionality in SharePoint can be added to a user’s token. The solution also allows for 
customization of people picker actions through the SharePoint infrastructure. A companion application to 
migrate existing user accounts to a SAML based claims authentication format is provided as part of the 
NASA Claims provider solution.
U.S. Government Purpose Release
NASA COVID-19 Contact Tracing and Tracking (CTT) Application MS C-26882-1
The NASA Office of the Chief Health and Medical Officer and the Office of the Chief Information Officer 
developed a contact tracing application to help control the spread of Coronavirus (COVID-19). NASA 
Contact Tracing is used to identify employees who may have been in contact with a COVID-19 case at a 
NASA installation. Trained NASA clinic employees interview the index case to trace back who they may have 
had recent contact with while at work. Subsequently, people who may have been exposed are contacted, 
interviewed about their symptomatic status, and encouraged to self-quarantine to prevent further spread. Of 
those contacts tested, if there is a new confirmed case of the virus, the process of contact tracing continues. 
U.S. and Foreign Release
NASA Hazard Management System (HMS) MS C-25694-1
The Web-based, access-controlled NASA HMS provides a centralized repository for hazards regardless of 
origin and offers the ability to report and manage real-time hazards and controls. The primary mechanism 
for identifying and documenting hazardous conditions within HMS lies in the creation and management of 
two types of analysis documents: Hazard Analyses (HAs) and Job Hazard Analyses (JHAs). While these 
two document types offer different approaches for hazard identification and classification, they both offer 
controls for mitigating hazards. HMS provides a framework within which HA and JHA documents are 
created, reviewed, and approved. Once approved, the hazardous conditions identified within a document 
are considered active. More important, the controls associated with the hazards are then also considered 
active. HMS includes the mechanisms required to evaluate hazards using standard Risk Assessment Code 
(RAC) scoring.
General Public Release
NASA Instrument Cost Model (NICM), Version 9c HQ N-11886-1
A probabilistic cost and schedule estimating tool. NICM has proven instrument cost and schedule modeling 
capabilities that provide probabilistic estimates at both the system and subsystem level for many different 
instrument types. NICM is used by all NASA centers to support agency-wide proposal activities and 
program-directed missions.
General Public Release
NASA Root Cause Analysis Tool (RCAT) LE W-19737-1
The NASA Root Cause Analysis Tool (RCAT) has been designed to facilitate the analysis of anomalies, close 
calls, and accidents and also identify the appropriate corrective actions to prevent recurrence. The software 
provides an analyst with a quick, easy-to-use, accurate, and repeatable method to perform and document 
root cause analysis, identify corrective actions, perform trending analysis, and generate usable data for 
probabilistic risk assessment. All possible causes of accidents (hardware, software, the environment, 
weather, natural phenomena, external events, human error) can be incorporated into the timeline and fault/
causal factor trees. The software features an intuitive logic diagramming capability and uses standard  
terminology, definitions, and symbols.
U.S. and Foreign Release
=====PAGE 44=====
Business Systems and Project Management
35
NASA Technology Transfer Program  Software Catalog 2025-26
Programmatic Cost Tool (PCT) NP O-50859-1
PCT explores the affordability of user-generated architectures for human spaceflight. The PCT is an Excel-
based tool using VBA code that produces a particular view of affordability, commonly called a sand chart, 
along with the underlying year-by-year costs for that architecture.
U.S. General Public Release
Project Cost-Estimating Capability (PCEC) MF S-33187-2
Used to develop cost estimates/models for space systems, this technology combines an Excel add-in with a 
simple, robust, and transparent collection of NASA cost-estimating relationships, statistics, work breakdown 
structures, and cost-estimating algorithms. The approach’s use of native Excel functionality to provide basic 
calculations limits the overhead required to maintain a model and affords more transparency to the user with 
regard to the calculations and equations involved in generating an estimate.
General Public Release
RedShift: Mobile App for Following the Tactical  
and Strategic Operations Meeting Schedule NP O-50256-1
RedShift is an application for iOS and Android that presents the meeting agenda for MSL strategic and 
tactical meeting events that are a part of the operations workflow.
Open Source
Schedule Test and Assessment Tool (STAT), Version 5.0 MF S-33362-1
STAT 5.0 is a schedule management software add-in developed to work specifically within Microsoft 
Project. STAT provides the automated capability to quickly identify, quantify, and report numerous types 
of critical schedule-assessment data for management use. This software provides clear and objective 
reporting of key schedule-assessment information, including logic network integrity indicators, performance 
and trend metrics, schedule driver identification, data comparisons, margin and milestone tracking, and 
various other analysis data that can be used by project teams to assist in management decision making. 
General Public Release
Shipping Foam Designer Software MS C-25515-1
The Shipping Foam Designer Software is an easy-to-use design tool that allows the user to select the proper 
type and dimensions of shock-attenuating packing foam. A simple graphical user interface is provided. The 
software was developed in response to a large number of documented cases of critical hardware failures 
that resulted from drops during shipment.
General Public Release
Source Lines Counter (SLiC), Version 4.0 NPO -45962-1
SLiC has been used in a variety of projects and missions at the Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL). It is the 
official code counter endorsed by the Software Quality Improvement Project for its metrics collections effort 
across JPL. SLiC provides data for cost models used during all major JPL pre-Phase A software estimation 
activities, as well as cost validation activities throughout project lifecycles. 
U.S. Government Purpose Release
Stennis Space Center (SSC) Site Status Mobile Application SS C-00424
This application provides SSC civil servants, contractors, and tenants the ability to view the NASA center’s 
weather radar and current site status bulletin from a mobile device. The application also alerts users via 
push notification when a new site status is posted. It is available at the Apple App Store.
General Public Release
=====PAGE 45=====
Business Systems and Project Management
36
NASA Technology Transfer Program  Software Catalog 2025-26
Wikimoji – The Internet of Management Things (IoMT) AR C-18132-1
Wikimoji (Wiki + Emoji ) IoMT offer enhancements to the NASA ARC Context Based Configuration 
Management System (CBCMS) invention. IoMT fills the gap between the Industrial Internet of Things (IIoT) 
and the consumer Internet of Things (IoT) by covering the critical human elements and organizational gaps 
that help manage, navigate, and control systems of systems. It expands the CBCMS objects by providing 
wiki-page like features as electronic documents or linked to other entities. Wikimojis support efficient 
tracking of key organizational and management activities related to business operations and integration 
of systems of systems. They can be grouped into channels and autonomously conduct data mining/
information crawling on targeted information systems searching for related data. IoMT captures human 
and organizational elements, decisions, intent and feedback. The quality and range of icons have been 
expanded substantially forming an ontology of management functions packaged into an online drag and 
drop library for ease of use.
U.S. Release Only
=====PAGE 46=====
3737
Crew and Life Support
Biological Sensors, Food, Medical, Biological Analysis, 
Crew Support, Basic Human Model, and Cognition
37 37
Expedition 62 flight engineer and NASA astronaut Jessica Meir works on orbital plumbing tasks inside the International 
Space Station Tranquility module’s Life Support Rack in February of 2020. Credit: NASA
=====PAGE 47=====
38
Crew and Life Support
NASA Technology Transfer Program  Software Catalog 2025-26
Featured Software
Multi-Attribute Task Battery (MATB-II) LA R-17835-1
MATB-II is a computer-based task battery designed to facilitate research in human multiple task 
performance with consideration for the effects of automation. The tool includes five component tasks: 
system monitoring, tracking, communications monitoring, and resource management. A scheduling window 
provides preview of anticipated workload, and component tasks can be automated or manual. Coded in 
C++, MATB-II has been tested on the Windows XP Service Pack 3, Windows Vista, and Windows 7  
operating systems.
General Public Release 
HZETRN 2020 LA R-19979-1
This latest update to the HZETRN deterministic space radiation transport code contains new algorithms 
and options for calculating three-dimensional transport in user-defined combinatorial or ray-trace geometry. 
More computationally efficient bi-directional algorithms may be used to perform transport through multilayer 
slabs. Users may also opt to create an interpolation database for various thicknesses within one to three 
user-defined material layers using a straight-ahead transport algorithm. Calculations may be executed 
for galactic cosmic ray, solar particle event, low-Earth orbit, and user-defined environment boundary 
conditions. 
General Public Release
RITRACKS: A Software for Simulation of Stochastic Radiation Track Structure,  
Micro- and Nano-Dosimetry, Radiation Chemistry, and DNA Damage by Heavy Ions MS C-25937-1
RITRACKS has been developed over the last several years at Johnson Space Center to simulate the effects 
of ionizing radiations at the microscopic scale and to understand the effects of space radiation at the 
biological level. The fundamental part of this code is the stochastic simulation of radiation track structure of 
heavy ions, an important component of space radiations. The code can calculate many relevant quantities 
such as radial dose, as well as voxel dose, and it may also be used to calculate the dose in spherical and 
cylindrical targets of various sizes. Recently, DNA structure and damage simulations at the molecular scale 
have been incorporated into RITRACKS. 
General Public Release
38
=====PAGE 48=====
39
Crew and Life Support
NASA Technology Transfer Program  Software Catalog 2025-26
Acute Radiation Risk and BRYNTRN Organ Dose (ARRBOD), Version 2.1 M SC-26211-1
ARRBOD is a radiation risk projection model for typical space traveling scenarios that calculates gender- 
dependent organ doses and various acute radiation responses due to some historical large solar particle 
events (SPEs). 
General Public Release
Agent-Based Model for Microbial Populations Exposed to Radiation (AMMPER) A RC-18739-1
Agent-Based Model for Microbial Populations Exposed to Radiation (AMMPER) simulates the effects of 
proton-based galactic cosmic radiation (GCR) on Saccharomyces cerevisiae population growth. Through 
the implementation of data generated from Relativistic Ion Tracks (RITRACKS), a radiation traversal track 
structure simulator, the amount and severity of radiation-induced damage can be calculated and used to 
determine the continued viability of individual cells. Through the implementation of this model, the effects 
of deep-space radiation on entire microbial populations can be predicted and used to assist in designing 
biological missions for the deep-space environment.
Open Source
Fine Motor Skills (FMS) Software Application M SC-26032-1
The Fine Motor Skills (FMS) software test battery is designed to collect data from multiple tasks that 
are indicative of fine motor performance. It was developed to evaluate the effect of microgravity on the 
sensorimotor system during six-month and one-year missions on the International Space Station (ISS). The 
application runs on an iOS platform, and is intended for use on an iPad. The data recorded on the iPad can 
be sent to a server or retrieved from iTunes directly from the device.
Open Source
GCR Event-Based Risk Model Code (GERMcode) M SC-24760-1
GERMcode provides scientists with data interpretation of their experiments. For mono-energetic ion beams, 
basic physical and biological properties are calculated for a selected ion type, such as kinetic energy, 
mass, charge number, absorbed dose, or fluence. Evaluated quantities include linear energy transfer, range, 
absorption and fragmentation cross-sections, and the probability of nuclear interactions. In addition, a set 
of biophysical properties are evaluated (e.g., Poisson distribution for a specified cellular area, cell survival 
curves, and DNA damage yields per cell). GERMcode also calculates the radiation transport of the beam 
line for either a fixed number of user-specified depths or at multiple positions along the Bragg curve of the 
particle in a selected material.
General Public Release
HZETRN 2020 L AR-19979-1
HZETRN2020 is the latest evolution of the HZETRN space radiation transport code. It is a deterministic 
radiation transport code capable of calculating the transport of the large variety and broad energy spectra 
of particles found in the space environment through shielding materials. HZETRN2020 contains updated 
algorithms for calculating three dimensional transport in user-defined combinatorial or ray-traced geometry, 
or users can opt to create an interpolation database for various thicknesses of one to three user defined 
materials using a “straight ahead” (1D) transport algorithm. Pions and muons are explicitly coupled to the 
neutron and light ion solutions in HZETRN2020. HZETRN2020 supports calculations for galactic cosmic ray, 
solar particle event, and low earth orbit environments. HZETRN2020 also allows the input of user-defined 
environment boundary conditions, and SPE environment options include fits to historic events and spectra 
defined by the user with commonly used fitting functions.
General Public Release
=====PAGE 49=====
40
Crew and Life Support
NASA Technology Transfer Program  Software Catalog 2025-26
LED Lighting Panel Software Simulation Tool K SC-13752
The software tool was originally designed and implemented for use with the Advanced Biological Research 
System (ABRS) lighting panel upgrade. The upgrade was required since the LEDs used in the original design 
are no longer available in small quantity, and newer LEDs have a much higher efficiency. Even though the 
software tool is currently written for a flat panel containing LEDs pointing normal to the panel, the equations 
used are fundamental to the physics of the problem and therefore can be applied to any geometrical 
configuration by implementing a modified user interface.
General Public Release
Modified OpenSim Rajagopal Full Body Model M SC-26872-1
This modified human skeletal model for use with the open-source biomechanics software, OpenSim, 
enables enhanced representation of data collected from human test subjects performing upper body tasks 
and aids simulation in spaceflight project areas such as exercise system development.
Open Source
Multi-Attribute Task Battery (MATB-II) L AR-17835-1
MATB-II is a computer-based task battery designed to facilitate research in human multiple task 
performance with consideration for the effects of automation. The tool includes five component tasks: 
system monitoring, tracking, communications monitoring, resource management, and a scheduling window 
provides preview of anticipated workload, and component tasks can be automated or manual. 
General Public Release
NASA Space Radiation Cancer Risk (NSCR) Model 2012 M SC-25352-1
NSCR is an integration of various components of the cancer risk projection model used for assessing 
radiation-induced cancer risks for humans in space. It utilizes the latest analysis of human radio 
epidemiology for low-linear energy transfer (LET) radiation and cancer, as well as survival rates in the U.S. 
population and a population of never-smokers. Models of space environments and radiation transport are 
used to determine organ exposures behind spacecraft shielding. NSCR uses Monte-Carlo propopagation of 
errors in various factors to determine the overall uncertainties in radiation cancer projections.
U.S. Government Purpose Release
NASA Task Load Index (TLX) iOS A RC-15150-1A
The NASA Task Load Index (TLX) provides multi-dimensional ratings of overall workload based on a 
weighted average of six subscales: mental demands, physical demands, temporal demands, performance, 
effort, and frustration. Data collection may be performed through an iPhone or an iPad.
General Public Release
Network-Form Game Software Library (libnfg) A RC-16764-1
The libnfg software library describes how humans interact with their environment and with other humans. 
The tool provides a Monte Carlo analysis of user-specified “network-form games,” which are flexible 
modeling methodologies that combine Bayes nets and game theory to model complex systems.
Open Source
=====PAGE 50=====
41
Crew and Life Support
NASA Technology Transfer Program  Software Catalog 2025-26
RITRACKS: A Software for Simulation of Stochastic Radiation Track Structure,  
Micro- and Nano-Dosimetry, Radiation Chemistry, and DNA Damage by Heavy Ions M SC-25937-1
RITRACKS has been developed over the last several years at Johnson Space Center to simulate the effects 
of ionizing radiations at the microscopic scale and to understand the effects of space radiation at the 
biological level. The fundamental part of this code is the stochastic simulation of radiation track structure of 
heavy ions, an important component of space radiations. The code can calculate many relevant quantities 
such as radial dose, as well as voxel dose, and it may also be used to calculate the dose in spherical and 
cylindrical targets of various sizes. Recently, DNA structure and damage simulations at the molecular scale 
have been incorporated into RITRACKS. 
General Public Release
Second Generation Beacon (SGB) Performance Analysis Test Tools G SC-18375-1
NASA built spread Spectrum Second Generation Beacons intended to comply with all Cospas-Sarsat T.018 
requirements.  NASA has built a set of test tools to evaluate the performance of the SGB.  The tools use 
Digital Signal Processing (DSP) to analyze the transmit characteristics and demodulate the message. The 
test tools are written in MATLAB scripts.
Open Source
Space Science Investigations: Plant Growth M SC-26184-1
This interactive app for mobile platforms teaches about growing plants in space. Downloads are available on 
Apple or Google App Stores (no agreement with NASA needed).
General Public Release
VESsel GENeration Analysis (VESGEN) 2D Software A RC-17621-1
VESGEN maps and quantifies key parameters in black-and-white images of vascular trees and networks 
that are important for astronaut and terrestrial pathologies such as inflammation and angiogenesis in 
diabetes and tumors.
U.S. and Foreign Release
=====PAGE 51=====
4242
Data and Image 
Processing
Algorithms, Data Analysis, Data Processing
4242
NASA’s Joint EVA and Human Surface Mobility Test Team (JETT) develops hardware and operational concepts 
for lunar surface operations during the upcoming Artemis missions. For testing and training, the team seeks out 
environments analogous to the lunar surface, such as the San Francisco Volcanic Fields north of Flagstaff, Arizona, 
seen here in a JETT advanced Artemis Run in May of 2024. Credit: NASA
=====PAGE 52=====
Data and Image Processing
43
NASA Technology Transfer Program  Software Catalog 2025-26
Featured Software
WinPlot Graphical Display System MFS -31664-1
WinPlot is a powerful desktop graphical analysis tool that allows the user to generate displays of 
unrestricted amounts of data. It was developed to fulfill the need for fast and easily managed graphical 
displays of NASA test articles and facilities. WinPlot features include seamless displays of real-time and 
post-test data with time and event-time synchronization of data from multiple sources.
General Public Release
Dynamic Onboard Ubiquitous Graphics (DOUG) Software Application MS C-23586-1
The Dynamic Onboard Ubiquitous Graphics (DOUG) is a 3D rendering software package used for simulation 
and virtual reality display systems.
General Public Release
Distributed Observer Network (DON), Version 3.1 KS C-13775
DON3 is the innovative combination of NASA simulation technologies, NASA information technologies, and 
commercial video game technology to provide a unique system that leverages the strengths of all three. 
A key component is a standardized data interface for simulation-related information that is coupled with 
custom software integrated into the game environment. 
U.S. and Foreign Release
43
=====PAGE 53=====
Data and Image Processing
44
NASA Technology Transfer Program  Software Catalog 2025-26
3D GRAPE/AL: Three-Dimensional Grids About Anything  
by Poisson Equations, Version 3 LAR-17758-1
The 3.0 suite of 3DGRAPE/AL software advances the state of the art in structured volume grid generation 
by implementing a new matching point block-to-block boundary condition on adjacent faces of two 
blocks. The software also has two preprocessors that enable rapid development of the input data to run 
3DGRAPE/AL. 
U.S. Release Only
3D Ground Control Station for Aerial Vehicles NPO-50759-1
This software provides a 3D graphical user interface for intuitive generation, assessment, and modification 
of optimal trajectories for quadrotors through obstacle rich environments. Implemented in the software are 
three state-of-the-art algorithms that plan trajectories through a premapped obstacle field. The software is 
designed to be integrated with a hardware system to record a flown trajectory to repeat, send trajectories 
to a quadrotor to fly, and get live feedback during a flight. Use cases of the software include assessment of 
existing or new trajectory optimization algorithms, assessing feasibility of operations in a given environment, 
and the operational planning and flying of a quadrotor. The operational application is for flying in a 
premapped environment, and requires other software tools for the complete system (map generation, and 
hardware system).
Open Source
3D Mapping Software for High-Resolution Display  
of Hail and Rain Data from NWS Radar KSC-12952
This software can be used to generate a 3D hail/rain map around a large structure (e.g., a launchpad or a 
power plant).
U.S. Release Only
ACCEPT: Adverse Condition and Critical Event Prediction Toolbox ARC-16839-1
This MATLAB-based source code includes an overall software infrastructure framework and two main 
software components. The software infrastructure framework consists of code written to preprocess data, 
pass information between the two main software components, learn models that will be shared by nearly all 
of the elements in one of the two software components (which will require calling third-party open-source 
software modules), and select which element/method should be used in each one of the two main software 
components. The two main software components can use interchangeable software elements that enable 
the regression and detection functionality.
Open Source
AFIDS: Automated Fusion of Image Data System NPO-52175-1
This library is a subset of the JPL Video Image Communication and Retrieval (VICAR) image processing 
system. AFIDS incorporates “georeferenced map images” into VICAR using the AFIDS “VicarGT” format 
(a compatible version of the “GeoTIFF” format). AFIDS includes orthorectify and coregister orbital satellite 
imagery and image processing tools to perform scientific analysis and research of co-registered imagery 
AFIDS support MISR, MAIA, CloudSat, EMIT, ECOSTRESS, OCO2, and more in addition to mapping 
support for Mars and planetary orbital datasets. This collection of 200+ vicar-based programs and scripts 
relies on other libraries including GDAL, GeoTIFF, Python, JPL GEOCAL, NASA NAIF/SPICE, and others. 
General Public Release
=====PAGE 54=====
Data and Image Processing
45
NASA Technology Transfer Program  Software Catalog 2025-26
AMMOS Instrument Toolkit (AIT) NPO-50696-1
The AMMOS Instrument Toolkit (AIT) is a Python-based software suite developed to handle Ground Data 
System (GDS), Electronic Ground Support Equipment (EGSE), commanding, telemetry uplink/downlink, 
and sequencing for JPL International Space Station and CubeSat Missions. This toolkit is a lightweight 
operations and data processing resource for instruments and small satellites. It provides traditional uplink 
and downlink capabilities across all phases of the project lifecycle from early development and prototyping, 
through to integration and test, and ultimately operations. 
Open Source
AMMOS Instrument Toolkit (AIT) Sequence Editor NPO-52061-1
The AIT Sequence Editor is a generalization and expansion of the AMMOS Instrument Toolkit providing 
sequence editing capabilities for the AMMOS Instrument Toolkit. The editor uses AIT command dictionary 
to provide command validation and completion capability to assist users while working with AIT sequences. 
The editor also provides a loading and saving of seq.json capability for the generated sequences. 
Open Source
Analysis Software for Cosmic Microwave Background Research GSC-17667-1
This is a suite of analysis tools for cosmic microwave background research. It currently consists of an 
implementation of the pure C_\ell cosmic microwave background power spectrum estimator, as well as an 
implementation of the mode-mixing matrix calculation.
Open Source
ARAJ Low-Density Parity Check (LDPC) Codes NPO-43949-1
This software provides a construction method for protograph-based Low-Density Parity Check (LDPC) 
codes that simultaneously achieve low iterative decoding thresholds and linear minimum distance. The 
technology can be used for various code rates. Proposed codes may have either fixed input block or fixed 
output block sizing. Both cases provide rate compatibility. In fact, one encoder and one decoder can 
support different code rates.
U.S. Government Purpose Release
arcjetCV ARC-18837-1
arcjetCV is a software application developed in Python which processes arc jet test videos to extract 
time-resolved 2D recession measurements. The application employs convolutional neural net models 
(Tensorflow/Keras/OpenCV) to provide a generalized edge detection/extraction algorithm. The software 
provides a basic graphical user interface (PyQt) for viewing the edge detection and plotting the time-
dependent recession. The application streamlines and automates the many steps needed to extract 
recession data from video, enabling extraction of time-resolved recession to be standardized.
Open Source
ASSESS: Automatic Semantic Search Engine for Suitable Standards NPO-52309-1
This is an AI/ML application for the Department of Homeland Security that can assess what government 
standards and regulations apply to a given input (e.g. a document, text string, etc.).
Open Source
Asteroid Survey Simulation Tool NPO-50825-1
The software allows simulation of both ground-based and space-based surveys. This tool is fast and 
efficient, capable of accepting user-defined asteroid model populations and telescope parameters such 
as a list of pointing angles, camera field-of-view shape, etc. and generating an output list of detectable 
asteroids. The software takes advantage of the widely used and tested SPICE library and architecture 
developed by NASAs Navigation and Ancillary Information Facility (NAIF) to save and asteroid trajectories 
and camera pointing.
Open Source
=====PAGE 55=====
Data and Image Processing
46
NASA Technology Transfer Program  Software Catalog 2025-26
Astromaterials 3D Website and Explorer Application MSC-27059-1
This is the first virtual library of NASA’s collections of Apollo Lunar and Antarctic meteorite samples. This 
web-based custom visualization tool  presents each extraterrestrial rock in a visually stunning, information-
rich manner. This is the first virtual library of NASA’s collections of Apollo Lunar and Antarctic meteorite 
samples. This web-based custom-visualization tool presents each extraterrestrial rock in a visually stunning, 
information rich manner.
General Public Release
AutoBayes: Automatic Design of Customized Analysis Algorithms and Programs ARC-16276-1
AutoBayes uses extended Bayesian networks, a powerful symbolic system, and algorithm schemas to 
automatically generate efficient and customized programs for data analysis. It generates a standardized 
design document containing a graphical representation of the Bayesian network and of the details regarding 
the code’s generation.
Open Source
Automated Colorization of M2020 SHERLOC Context Images NPO-52595-1
This technology is Python script that uses functions from the OpenCV library to automatically detect 
keypoints within images from two subsystems of SHERLOC, the ACI and WATSON imagers. These 
keypoints are then matched and used to warp the WATSON image to the ACI, resulting in a “colorized” 
ACI. This ACI is co-boresighted with the SHERLOC spectrometer, and the resulting image product can 
allow for analysis of spectral, textural, and color information of observed rock surfaces. It can be used as a 
standalone script and the resulting colorized ACIs can be integrated into the Loupe software (created by K. 
Uckert) for SHERLOC data analysis.
General Public Release
Automated Snow Index Tool (ASIT) LAR-19128-1
This software loads in image collections from Google Earth Engine from different sensors (Landsat 5, 7, and 
8, and Sentinel 2a, 2b). The code identifies pixels using two snow indices – Normalized Difference Snow 
Index (NDSI) and the Saito S3 Snow Index. The area of snow can then be calculated for a region or for an 
individual watershed.
Open Source
Automatic Image Analysis of Environmental Barrier Coating Thermally  
Grown Oxide Layers using Machine Learning and Computer Vision LEW-20492-1
This code uses machine learning and computer vision to automatically measure microstructure features 
from images of environmental barrier coatings. Quantifying microstructure is critical to designing better 
materials by establishing processing-structure-property relationships. Previous measurement techniques 
relied on manual human measurements which is extremely time consuming, prone to bias, and requires 
expertise. This software can automatically and accurately measure oxide thickness, roughness, porosity, 
and crack spacing in a matter of seconds, and the results are repeatable and comparable between research 
groups. The open source GUI and algorithms can be adapted to perform other types of image analysis and 
have been applied to analyze many other material microstructures.
Open Source
Autonomous Data Reduction for NASA Earth Science Data NPO-45583-1
NASA atmospheric and Earth science missions generate vast amounts of data every day. Clustering 
algorithms are used in various applications including pattern recognition, classification, data compression,  
regression, and related optimization problems. The design implements a computational solution for an 
autonomous data-reduction/clustering process to produce a representative distribution and joint  
relationships of the data without assuming a specific type of distribution and relationship nor resorting  
to domain-specific knowledge about the data. 
U.S. Government Purpose Release
=====PAGE 56=====
Data and Image Processing
47
NASA Technology Transfer Program  Software Catalog 2025-26
AutoPost MFS-32925-1
AutoPost can process any configuration of test data as needed. The tool can combine a series of data 
parameters into a single parameter.
U.S. Release Only
BALFIT: A Multivariate Regression Analysis Tool ARC-15804-1A
BALFIT is designed for the automated regression analysis of wind tunnel strain-gage balance calibration 
data. Related strain-gage balance data analysis tasks are also supported. In addition, BALFIT performs  
an automated regression analysis of more general multivariate data sets at a basic level.
U.S. Release Only
Bingo Mini-App LAR-19460-1
Software that performs symbolic regression through the use of genetic programming. It uses a genetic-
algorithm-based procedure to find free-form equations that describe an input dataset.
Open Source
BodyDataReader NPO-51530-1
BodyDataReader is an ephemeris and physical constants reader that makes it easy to retrieve data on any 
body in the solar system. It gathers data (position, mass, other physical constants) on solar-sytem bodies 
(planets, moons, asteroids) from publicly available JPL websites and returns it via user-friendly queries. Data 
is retrieved from JPL Horizons, the JPL Small-Body Database, and the NAIF SPICE system. Retrieved data 
is saved locally for fast access later.
Open Source
Campaign Analysis Mapping and Planning Tool (CAMP) NPO-51390-1
The Campaign Analysis Mapping and Planning tool (CAMP) provides an advanced web-based geospatial 
data creation tool for a distributed user base. This tool is designed for science operations to create strategic 
targets for mission guidance as well as a collaborative tool to make, edit, and share geospatial data.
Open Source
Cassini RADAR SAR Processor, Preprocessor,  
and Topography from SAR (SARTopo) Processor NPO-51960-1
The Cassini RADAR instrument onboard the Cassini Orbiter is currently collecting SAR Imagery of the 
surface of Saturn’s largest moon, Titan. The ground processing of Cassini SAR data focuses on the unusual 
features of the data and how these features impact the processing. A data dependent mechanism eliminates 
artifacts due to attitude and ephemeris knowledge error. Trade off SAR performance vs. area of coverage 
informs spacecraft pointing profiles.
Open Source
CERBERUS: Bayesian Retrieval Scheme for Efficiently Applying High  
Dimensionality Model Spaces to The Study of Exoplanet Atmospheres NPO-50770-1
CERBERUS estimates properties of exoplanet atmospheres – planets that orbit nearby stars – based on 
spectroscopic observations from astronomical observatories. A Bayesian approach coupled with a novel 
branch-pruning method supporting efficient evaluations of a complex model space that incorporates 
both thermos-chemical equilibrium (TCE) and non-TCE models for atmospheric chemistry. The forward 
models used in the retrieval process include a detailed radiative transfer equations and support for both 
gaseous and aerosol opacity sources. Vertical dependence is supported. The model selection capability 
of CERBERUS is a significant advancement over the current state of the art. When combined with the new 
high spectral resolution observations that are now becoming available, CERBERUS allows new insights into 
exoplanet atmospheres and allows rapid processing of large datasets.
Open Source
=====PAGE 57=====
Data and Image Processing
48
NASA Technology Transfer Program  Software Catalog 2025-26
CertWare Safety Case Workbench Software LAR-18067-1
This technology contributes several core modules to support safety-case models and offers a service-
based application programming interface that enables new model-processing capabilities to be plugged 
into the workbench.
Open Source
Chapter 10 Tools: Solving the Challenges of Varying  
Implementations of the IRIG Standard DRC-014-009
Sometimes even though post-flight processing data files originating from various onboard digital recorders 
follow the Range Commanders Council Inter-Range Instrumentation Group (IRIG) 106 Chapter 10 Digital 
Recording Standard, they use differing interpretations of it. This software toolkit reads data files regardless 
of the vendor implementation of the source recorder, display data, identify and correct errors, and produce 
a data file that can be successfully processed post-flight.
General Public Release
Chesapeake Bay Chlorophyll Hotspot Identifier (CBCHI) LAR-18794-1
CBCHI uses raw Landsat 8 surface reflectance products to produce two ArcMaps to identify chlorophyll 
hotspots. It also creates a true color image.
Open Source
Classification and Verification Editor (CaVE) LAR-18861-1
This code improves the efficiency of analyzing multiple classification methods in order to produce 
accurate classified images for land use and land cover change. Instead of running multiple classifications, 
validations and algorithms separately, this is all performed through one script with one condensed output 
located in the console.
Open Source
Cloud-based Data Match-Up Service (CDMS) In Situ-Data Services NPO-52071-1
The CDMS In Situ-Data Services can be used by in situ-data providers to provide a standardized interface 
to in situ-data that can be used for satellite-to-in situ-data match up.
Open Source
Cloud-based Data Processing System for ECCO NPO-51406-1
ECCO-Cloud leverages serverless cloud-based solution to automate product generation and to establish 
a cloud-based analytics center for fast access and interactive analysis using the Apache Science Data 
Analytics Platform.
Open Source
Cloudspotting on Mars Analysis Tools NPO-52537-1
This code enables reading, processing, and plotting Mars Climate Sounder (MCS) data (available on the 
Planetary Data System).
General Public Release
CMF2PNG_V2 NPO-52396-1
The CMF2PNG_V2 software generates PNG imagery from 4-band airborne imagery.
General Public Release
=====PAGE 58=====
Data and Image Processing
49
NASA Technology Transfer Program  Software Catalog 2025-26
Coastal Mid-Atlantic METRIC Model  LAR-18665-1
This software calculates evapotranspiration rates of agricultural fields by executing the METRIC model in 
an ArcGIS Python script. It requires input data from Landsat 8 OLI/TIRS and local weather stations. The 
software was developed to reduce irrigation costs for farmers and provide a means to monitor droughts.
Open Source
Comprehensive Analysis of Time Series Forecasting Using Neural Networks NPO-51540-1
This is an advanced machine learning method to predict future gas production in tight rock 
unconventional reservoirs. A particular capability is early prediction over a range of horizons, only from 
data collected in the first weeks to months.
Open Source
Connection of Cameo Simulation Toolkit with RabbitMQ Messaging Service NPO-50468-1
Cameo Simulation Toolkit provides the first in an industry-extendable model execution framework based 
on OMG fUML and W3C SCXML standards. It enables the validation of system behavior by executing, 
animating, and debugging models of the system in the context of realistic mock-ups of the intended user 
interface.
Open Source
Constellation PRACA Extension of the Bugzilla Application ARC-16033-1
The Constellation PRACA I-1 system is a modified version of a defect-tracking tool called Bugzilla. Bugzilla 
allows software developers to document and track outstanding bugs in their products. In the Constellation 
PRACA I-1 system, these core capabilities have been extended to provide the necessary functionality and 
usability defined in the PRACA processing requirements.
Open Source
Container Resource Allocation Manager (CRAM) GSC-19050-1
CRAM is a protocol and reference implementation for describing a job executed on a compute cluster 
along with all information needed, prioritization of the job, and resource requirements. It also defines 
an application programming interface (API) for interacting with a simple reference implementation of 
the protocol demonstrating its use. The reference implementation utilizes Kubernetes as the underlying 
scheduling system.
Open Source
Convenient and Flexible Satellite Data Spatial-Temporal Collocation System GSC-18900-1
Data collocation is often a critical initial step in many remote sensing applications to fuse data from multiple 
instruments. This systems provides users a convenient and flexible approach to collocate data from 
arbitrary sensors and/or platforms based on their own requirements.
Open Source
Convolutional Neural Networks for Spacecraft Pose Estimation NPO-51334-1
The software trains and tests convolutional neural networks to determine the spacecraft pose estimation. 
It also contains functionality to perform image preprocessing, data augmentation, and tensorflow model 
compression. The software takes a unique approach that incorporates more image data than other 
approaches while retaining the original spatial dimensions. Other approaches will down sample images 
significantly which causes the neural network to lose a lot of spatial information retarding robustness. 
The software is designed to estimate the pose of a spacecraft based on an image of that spacecraft. 
This includes the relative position and attitude of the target satellite with respect to a chasing satellite. 
Application of this technology aids functions such as active debris removal and formation flying among 
other applications.
Open Source
=====PAGE 59=====
Data and Image Processing
50
NASA Technology Transfer Program  Software Catalog 2025-26
CORAL-TT:  
Calculating Oscillations in Regional Aquatic Locations – Temperature and Turbidity LAR-19547-1
This JavaScript code intended for Google Earth Engine (GEE) allows easy access to all data available on this 
free platform, calculates Normalized Difference Turbidity Index (NDTI) median over years and seasons, and 
calculates fluctuations between seasons. The code combines 27 years of satellite data and maps sea surface 
temperature (SST) using Level 3 Aqua Moderate Resolution Imaging Spectroradiometer (MODIS) processed 
by Earth Observing System Data and Information System (EOSDIS). The GEE user interface presents a graph 
that allows users to see fluctuations in SST at any given selected point of interest over time. The user can also 
specify dates, image collections, and a study area to display and export a map of interest.
Open Source
Core Hierarchical Segmentation (HSEG) Software Package GSC-15855-1
This version of HSEG is not subject to patent restrictions.
Open Source
Coronagraph Alignment and Calibration Software  NPO-52194-1
Coronagraphs are a promising technology for the direct imaging of exoplanets at high contrast. To provide 
peak performance, coronagraphs must be well aligned and calibrated. This software package provides 
alignment and calibration routines for several common types of coronagraphs, along with functional tests to 
demonstrate the accuracy of the provided algorithms.
General Public Release
COVER: Calibrate Observed Vegetation Estimates Remotely LAR-19181-1
The source code provided develops calibration models using linear regression models with in-situ field data. 
The calibration models are then used to predict biomass (log), nitrogen percent, and nitrogen content for 
Landsat images from 2006-2016. Model results and data tables are output as separate files for each field 
season (i.e. winter and spring seasons).
Open Source
Cover Crop Remotely Observed Performance (CCROP) LAR-19113-1
The source code extracts Normalized Difference Vegetation Index (NVDI) values from Landsat 5, Landsat 
8, and Sentinel-2 images. NDVI values are averaged within field boundaries for each image and exported 
as a table with field ID and average NDVI value (with image date as the column header) for each date in a 
given range. 
Open Source
COVERAGE Visualization Generation Pipeline NPO-52577-1
The COVERAGE (coverage-vizgen) is a software package containing a comprehensive set of utility tools for 
generating tiled map imagery in the Meta Raster Format (MRF) from NetCDF data files. It is packaged as 
a Docker container that may be configured to automatically produce imagery from a forward data stream 
of NetCDF files. This software was developed for the CEOS Ocean Variables Enabling Research and 
Applications for GEO (COVERAGE) initiative.
General Public Release
=====PAGE 60=====
Data and Image Processing
51
NASA Technology Transfer Program  Software Catalog 2025-26
Cross-Institutional Open-source Collaborative for NASA’s Multi-Mission  
Algorithm and Analysis Platform (MAAP) High-End Computing (HEC)  
and Amazon Web Services (AWS) Development, Integration and Deployment  NPO-52250-1
This updated MAAP allows seamless employment of the compute/storage capacity of both AWS and 
NASA HECC for algorithm development and data processing and analysis. The NAS enabled deployment 
of these containerized algorithm workloads are interoperable across AWS and Pleiades. Data management 
services are also updated to enable automatic data migration between AWS storage and local storage on 
Pleiades. A separate MAAP development system accommodates the changes required for AWS-NASA HEC 
infrastructure needs and to develop new capabilities. Science algorithm software,  the Jupyter notebooks, 
and the NASA HECC remain open.
Open Source
CryoFab: Harmonic Analysis of Isotropic Fields on the Sphere with Arbitrary Masks  NPO-52134-1
CryoFaB derives a harmonic basis adapted to the survey geometry of a galaxy survey. It does this in 2D
on the sphere and 3D similar to a spherical Fourier-Bessel decomposition. CryoFaB can also be used 
to calculate the pixel window and effect of the geometry on the power spectrum. The power spectrum 
covariance matrix can also be calculated. CryoFaB aims to handle wide-angle effects in the power spectrum 
measurement of galaxy surveys such as SPHEREx, Euclid, and Roman.
Open Source
DAISY: DAta to Image SYstem NPO-50269-1
Visualize Level 2 data with accurate geometry using DAISY software and the GIBS web services. L2 data 
geolocation is indexed and instrument viewing geometry is used to generate accurate data footprints per 
data point in the form of an index image. An index image contains index values in its pixels to associate 
the corresponding data to the pixel. The index image is used as input to the MRF generation software that 
is part of GIBS and served out as tiles to clients. Clients that receive the index tiles must also access the 
source data via a technology such as webification in order to pull out the data at the indices that are in the 
tile image. This allows science data to be transferred into a client as an “image.”
Open Source
Data Driven Solutions for General Satellite Maneuvers NPO-50934-1
This software solves the assignment problem in flying formations so that each satellite can go to the desired 
location with an optimal fuel expenditure while avoiding collisions with other satellites. This is accomplished 
by moving satellites from prespecified start and end points within a fixed amount of time.
Open Source
DataDrive Command-Line Interface NPO-52944-1
DataDrive provides data access and distribution for a mission’s data products in the Amazon Web Services 
(AWS) cloud utilizing the Operational Cloud Store (OCS). The CS3 Single Sign On (CSSO) or MGSS CAM 
provides authentication and authorization to DataDrive.
General Public Release
Deep Learning and Anomaly Detection in Mars Rover Data  NPO-51336-1
This software performs data processing and machine learning analysis used in the project Deep Learning 
and Anomaly Detection in Mars Rover Data Transmission. The files contain the signal processing directory 
and Python scripts to organize and clean a dataset before passing it into the various machine learning 
and deep learning models. The machine learning directory contains an Adversarial Auto encoder, a deep 
learning model used in reconstructing data, and a file for a One-Class SVM, which is used in detecting 
anomalies in the dataset. It also contains a deep neural network, which is used in classifying the success of 
different Mars downlink successes.
Open Source
=====PAGE 61=====
Data and Image Processing
52
NASA Technology Transfer Program  Software Catalog 2025-26
Deep Reinforcement Learning Model for High Level  
Science Planning Using Formation Flying NPO-51314-1
The software trains algorithms to optimize science return for Earth orbiting missions that use formation 
flight. The usage of deep learning techniques is uncommon for ground planning systems and has never 
been used before for onboard systems. The software has been designed with future onboard usage in mind. 
The software creates a plan for each satellite in the formation to maximize science data return and minimize 
fuel consumption.
Open Source
DejaVu NPO-50864-1
DejaVu is a software program for analyzing execution traces generated by a running system, typically 
another program, referred to as the monitored system (MS). The MS must be instrumented to emit events 
as it executes. The emitted trace is consumed by the DejaVu monitor, which verifies it against a property 
(requirement) formalized in first-order past time temporal logic. The system is  innovative in using BDDs 
(Binary Decision Diagrams) for storing data from the execution trace.
Open Source
DEVELOP: DRIP and SLIP Landslide Detection Package (DRIP-SLIP) LAR-18789-1
The DRIP-SLIP model automatically analyzes red band spectral information and soil moisture information 
derived from Landsat 8, ASTER, and SRTM data (at fine to moderate resolutions) to determine possible 
new landslide areas. This software increases the temporal latency for landslide products that emergency 
managers, planners, and scientists use in their work.
Open Source
DEVELOP: National Program Python Package LAR-18583-1
This package creates a Python programming environment for simple processing of large NASA data sets to 
prepare them for further analysis in an Esri ArcMap environment. It includes an instructional framework to 
guide users. 
Open Source
Distributed Observer Network (DON), Version 3.1 KSC-13775
DON3 is the innovative combination of NASA simulation technologies, NASA information technologies, and 
commercial video game technology to provide a unique system that leverages the strengths of all three. 
A key component is a standardized data interface for simulation-related information that is coupled with 
custom software integrated into the game environment. 
U.S. and Foreign Release
Dorado-Sensitivity GSC-18703-1
Dorado is a proposed space mission for ultraviolet follow-up of gravitational wave events. This repository 
contains a simple sensitivity and exposure time calculator for Dorado.
Open Source
Drought Severity Assessment Decision Support Tool LAR-18731-1
Within a user-specified boundary, this tool allows a user to calculate standardized precipitation index 
(SPI) values for each cell of a set of monthly precipitation raster’s that span at least thirty years. The tool 
calculates basic SPI statistics within a user specified boundary and allows for visualization of calculated SPI 
rasters over time.
Open Source
=====PAGE 62=====
Data and Image Processing
53
NASA Technology Transfer Program  Software Catalog 2025-26
DthData Armstrong Time-History Software Utility DRC-012-024
A standalone command-line-driven utility program, DthData processes time-history format data files  
generated by the Armstrong Core Simulation Software.
U.S. and Foreign Release
DthDiff Armstrong Time-History Difference Software Utility DRC-012-025
A standalone command-line-driven utility program, DthDiff is used to compare two Armstrong time-history 
format data files generated by the Armstrong Core Simulation Software.
U.S. and Foreign Release
Dynamic Onboard Ubiquitous Graphics (DOUG) Software Application MSC-23586-1
The Dynamic Onboard Ubiquitous Graphics (DOUG) is a 3D rendering software package used for simulation 
and virtual reality display systems.
General Public Release
ECCO Interactive Solution Evaluator  NPO-52394-1
The Estimating the Circulation and Climate of the Ocean (ECCO) consortium estimates ocean circulation 
and its role in climate - combining state-of-the-art ocean circulation models with global ocean data sets. 
Data visualizations of ECCO help scientists better understand these models and provide comparisons with 
other data sets. The ECCO Interactive Solution Evaluator is a web application that allows users to compare 
data visualizations of ECCO data fields with those from other data sources side-by-side. The application 
includes a map interface to select a region of interest and a charting tool to plot data for comparisons.
Open Source
Elimination of Parameter Input Requirement  
for Elliptic Grid-Generation Methods in Engineering ARC-14710-1
This software implements an enhanced method of elliptic grid generation.
U.S. Government Purpose Release
Elkhorn Slough Vegetation Imagery Assessment (ESVIA) LAR-19012-1
This script conducts marsh vegetation health analyses using remotely sensed imagery sources. It analyzes 
vegetation change in a historical time-series using Landsat imagery, as well as current day vegetation 
productivity using Sentinel 2A imagery. Included in the script are operations such as image acquisition, 
image processing, and applications of vegetation indices with band combinations.
Open Source
Embedded Power Controller with Safety E-Stop and LED Indicators  NPO-52467-1
The software runs on an embedded system which controls the power to computers and sensors within a 
robot. The software monitors voltages and currents and enables or disables the voltage regulators and load 
switches to power the various loads. The software also has control over an e-stop and lights to indicate the 
estop is enabled or disabled.  The software can control the brightness of high brightness LEDs.
General Public Release
Embedded GCC/gcov  NPO-52123-1
This software extracts gcov lines of code coverage data from software compiled with GCC and running on 
embedded systems, without requiring a file system, operating system, or even standard C libraries. This 
software provides the ability to select data output via serial port or memory dump or single output file, and 
provides other configuration options for adaptation to the user’s specific environment. And it provides a 
complete, encapsulated, flexible, portable, and documented method.
Open Source
=====PAGE 63=====
Data and Image Processing
54
NASA Technology Transfer Program  Software Catalog 2025-26
EMIT Science Data System  NPO-52219-1
This software suite facilitates the mapping of Earth surface mineralogy from remote imaging spectroscopy 
data, along with aggregation and interpretation of the use of these data in Earth system models.
Facilitates the analyses of the EMIT objectives: The net contribution of mineral dust to regional and global 
radiative forcing is to warm the atmosphere (positive forcing) and the impact of mineral dust on regional 
precipitation and radiative forcing will promote the expansion of dust source regions.
Open Source
Encoding and Decoding Library for the Bundle Protocol LEW-20091-1
As part of the implementation of a high-rate DTN, it was necessary to implement a standards-compliant 
software library that is capable of parsing various versions of protocol headers. This library offers some 
benefit to other NASA centers (and possibly academia, industry) interested in implementing the same.
Open Source
Event-Based Visual-Inertial Odometry  NPO-52048-1
Estimating the position of a robot (localization) is an important precursor to enabling a robot to navigate 
autonomously. Traditional camera-based localization methods fail when the robot is moving fast (motion 
blur) or when the robot is in very dark or bright environments (over/undersaturated pixels). An event 
camera is a new type of imaging sensor that reports changes in pixel brightness per pixel independently 
and asynchronously with microsecond resolution and overcomes both of these problems. However, the 
asynchronous nature of the data is a challenge for traditional “synchronous” pipelines that receive a full 
image at a time. This software offers a couple of approaches to processing this asynchronous event stream 
to estimate the position of an event camera.
Open Source
EVRTH: Virtual Reality Earth Data Visualization Using Streaming Tiled GIBS Data  NPO-50576-1
This code offers users a real-time globe textured with the latest imagery received from NASA spacecraft. 
Users are able to manipulate the globe and access scientific data. Features include: real and up-to-date 
image access; accessing the latest daily imagery from NASA’s Global Imagery Browse Services (GIBS); 
automatically fetching imagery at the correct level of detail based on globe scale and head distance; 
accessing imagery acquired at different times in the past; spinning the globe on two axes; positioning and 
scaling the globe; scrubbing and animating imagery over time; visualizing a 3D iso-surface of scientific data 
(e.g., gravity or water vapor), and visualizing scientific data that varies by altitude.
Open Source
exoVista: Planetary System Generator for Exoplanet Studies  GSC-19299-1
exoVista is scientific software that allows users to generate fictitious planetary systems around nearby stars. 
These modeled systems contain the stellar spectra as a function of time, planetary spectra and positions as 
a function of time, and synthetic images of modeled exozodiacal disks as a function of wavelength.
Open Source
Exploration Ground Data Systems (xGDS), Version 1 ARC-17174-1
The Exploration Ground Data System (xGDS) is an information-sharing software to support human and 
robot field science operations. xGDS includes tools for planning, execution monitoring, asset position 
tracking, mapping, data visualization, documentation and annotation, data analysis, search, data filtering 
and clustering, telemetry processing, recording and playback, bulk data import/export, mitigating impact of 
communications delays, panorama stitching, automated cross-linking of related data products, automated 
fault detection and data summarization, mobile device interfaces, video processing and playback, audio 
transcription, requirements traceability, performance and availability monitoring, and data backup and 
synchronization. 
Open Source
=====PAGE 64=====
Data and Image Processing
55
NASA Technology Transfer Program  Software Catalog 2025-26
Fast Linearized Coronagraph Optimizer (FALCO)  NPO-50715-1
The Fast Linearized Coronagraph Optimizer (FALCO) is a free toolbox of routines for coronagraphic focal 
plane wavefront correction. The goal of FALCO is to provide a modular, open-source framework for the 
simulation and/or testbed operation of several common types of coronagraphs. FALCO includes routines 
for pair-wise probing estimation of the complex electric field and Electric Field Conjugation (EFC) control. 
FALCO utilizes and builds upon PROPER, an established optical propagation library. The key innovation in 
FALCO is the rapid computation of the linearized response matrix for each deformable mirror (DM), which 
facilitates re-linearization after each control step for faster DM-integrated coronagraph design and wavefront 
correction experiments. FALCO is also available on Github as source code in MATLAB and Python.
Open Source
FAULT: Flood Analysis Utilizing Landsat and ArcMap Tools LAR-19127-1
This automated script performs high-level flood analysis to relieve work load for end-users. It incorporates 
Landsat 8 Operational Land Imager (OLI) tiles and utilizes computer-learning techniques to generate 
accurate water extent maps. The script, referencing the Moderate Resolution Imaging Spectroradiometer 
(MODIS) land-water mask, isolates areas of flood-induced waters. 
Open Source
Fep Extensible Proxy (FEP) ARC-18117-1
FEP is a communication framework that provides abstract message conversion from multiple plug-in 
microservices. FEP implements both a publish-subscribe and streaming data flow models to support 
real-time data visualization and validation as well as to facilitate post-processing and data analysis. Web 
interfaces are also provided through FEP to control, configure, and monitor the status of microservices 
and clients. The FEP provides flexibility and scalability through the ability to daisy chain multiple instances 
together or link via warehouse storage.
Open Source
Field Campaign eXplorer (FCX)  MFS-33977-1
Field Campaign eXplorer (FCX) is a cloud native web based 3D data visualization platform that can 
incorporate science data collected from instruments onboard aircraft, ground sensors, and satellites. 
The instrument data are displayed within an interactive map viewer along flight tracks. This advanced tool 
reduces the effort involved in discovering data. It’s designed for event-based research, allows for seamless 
movement between data visualization, discovery, and acquisition, and enhances the user experience by 
improving the usability of heterogeneous data.
Open Source
File Exchange Interface (FEI), Version 5 NPO-47089-1
The File Exchange Interface (FEI) service offers secure file transaction, store, transport, and management 
services. The latest distribution (code name Komodo) is a complete redesign from its predecessors, 
incorporating the latest computing technologies and standards.
Open Source
FiSSH: Find Suitable Spawning Habitat LAR-19474-1
This software utilizes Earth observation and citizen science data collected by the Grunion Greeters project 
to analyze ocean conditions and how they may relate to movement of the California grunion. The grunion is 
famous for beach spawning, and this tool will allow the user to get an idea of how large a spawning event 
is expected. This output is based on past spawning events and ocean conditions at those times. Moreover, 
interactive maps allow the user to visualize spatially what was happening in the surrounding coastal region 
during a particular time frame.
Open Source
=====PAGE 65=====
Data and Image Processing
56
NASA Technology Transfer Program  Software Catalog 2025-26
Flood Event Monitoring From In-Situ and Satellite Data Using Deep Learning  NPO-51916-1
The automated flood monitoring can be performed using deep neural network models that are trained on 
historical, known flood events.
Open Source
FOAM: Forward Ocean Atmosphere Microwave Radiative Transfer Model  NPO-52286-1
FOAM is an open-source package developed using the Python programming language. The central 
solver module coordinates inputs from various individual modules to simulate observations of polarimetric 
brightness temperatures (forward mode) and then retrieves ocean state parameters (inverse mode). Among 
the retrievable quantities are ocean state parameters (SSS, SST, OVW), and nuisance ancillary parameters 
(atmospheric opacity, ionospheric TEC, and galactic background radiation intensity).
General Public Release
FRinGE: Fine Resolution InSAR using Generalized Eigenvectors  NPO-51454-1
FRInGE is an InSAR time-series analysis toolbox which implements the state-of-the-art methods to 
efficiently explore the full capability of modern SAR observations to produce ground displacement time-
series at full resolution of SAR images at pixels dominated by Permanent Scatterers (PS) or Distributed 
Scatterers (DS). For DS pixels, FRInGE uses all possible interferometric pairs. FRInGE evaluates the 
temporal distribution of the backscatter of SAR images at each pixel to identify statistically self-similar 
neighbors in a pre-defined window. FRInGE forms a full covariance matrix of interferometric pairs for each 
DS pixel over its neighborhood. The phase series of the PS pixels are also extracted and together with 
the estimated phase series of DS pixels can be unwrapped. FRInGE enables efficient generation of a full 
coherence matrix (all possible pairs) which can be used for Damage Proxy Mapping and change detection.
Open Source
Gas Fitting Spectral Analysis software  NPO-44194-1
A suite of FORTRAN 77 programs developed to analyze solar absorption spectra and thereby determine the 
conventrations of various gases in the Earth’s atmosphere.
General Public Release
GeneLab Amplicon and Metagenomics Data Processing Pipelines  ARC-18677-1
This technology details each step in GeneLab’s standard pipelines for processing Amplicon and 
Metagenomics sequence data. These processing protocols have been wrapped into Snakemake workflows 
that utilize Conda environments. Instructions for installing and implementing these Snakemake workflows 
are included along with example processed datasets.
Open Source
GeneLab Methylation Sequencing Processing Pipeline and Workflows ARC-18948-1
This technology details each step in GeneLab’s standard pipeline for processing Methylation Sequencing 
(Methyl-Seq) data. These processing pipelines are being wrapped into Nextflow workflows that utilize 
Singularity containers. Instructions for installing and implementing the Nextflow workflows will be added as 
the workflow is developed.
Open Source
GeneLab Microarray Processing Pipelines and Workflows ARC-18949-1
This technology details each step in GeneLab’s standard pipeline for processing Microarray data derived 
from different platform types. These processing pipelines have been wrapped into Nextflow workflows 
that utilize Singularity containers. Instructions for installing and implementing the Nextflow workflows are 
included.
Open Source
=====PAGE 66=====
Data and Image Processing
57
NASA Technology Transfer Program  Software Catalog 2025-26
GeneLab RNA Sequencing Processing Pipeline and Workflow ARC-18862-1
This technology details each step in GeneLab’s standard pipeline for processing RNA sequence (RNAseq) 
data. This processing pipeline has been wrapped into a Nextflow workflow that utilizes Singularity 
containers. Instructions for installing and implementing the Nextflow workflow are included.
Open Source
Geographic Applications for Transitioning Everglades Regions (GATER) LAR-18943-1
This code provides an algorithm for cloud removal from Landsat scenes and runs a classification scheme 
that classifies mangrove extent within Everglades National Park. 
Open Source
Geometry Manipulation Protocol (GMP) for Computational Fluid Dynamics  
(CFD) Applications, Version 1.0 ARC-15193-1
GMP serializes data types between XML and ANSI C data structures to support CFD applications. The 
library currently provides a description of geometric configurations, general moving-body scenarios 
(prescribed and/or 6-DOF), and control surface settings. 
Open Source
GIANT: Goddard Image Analysis and Navigation Tool  GSC-18758-1
The Goddard Image Analysis and Navigation Tool (GIANT) is an API for performing various kinds of optical 
navigation (OpNav) through python scripts.  It provides the necessary tools for the most common OpNav 
tasks, including geometric camera calibration, camera attitude estimation, target center finding, surface 
feature navigation, and more. It makes it easy to add new capabilities through the modular components it 
exposes.  GIANT is mature and flight proven, having been used throughout the OSIRIS-REx mission in an 
independent verification and validation (IV&V) role with great success.
Open Source
GIBS: Machine Learning for Data Validation and Natural Event Detection  NPO-51089-1
NASA Global Imagery Browse Services (GIBS) provides a full-resolution image archive of over 70 million 
images and access to services for over 700 NASA Earth science data products covering every part of 
the world. Most imagery is available within 3 to 5 hours after satellite overpass, and some products span 
almost 30 years. While the GIBS satellite data remains highly accessible, it remains largely underexploited 
and analyzed due to its scale. The development of algorithms to ensure the consistency of data is critical 
for near-real time (NRT) applications. For data validation, machine learning techniques validate images for 
missing data patterns and miscoloration. For natural event detection deep learning leverages the scale of 
GIBS imagery to learn state-of-the-art algorithms. Lastly, we implement an operational machine learning 
system to process new images and notify GIBS operators.
Open Source
Global Assimilative Ionosphere Model (GAIM) NPO-40584-1
GAIM is used to estimate the three-dimensional electron density distribution of the Earth’s ionosphere as 
a function of time. To achieve high accuracy for users, the software accepts a wide variety of ionospheric 
measurements as input and produces output either in real time or in post-processing. The software can  
also generate predictions of the electron density structure for several hours or days into the future.
U.S. and Foreign Release
=====PAGE 67=====
Data and Image Processing
58
NASA Technology Transfer Program  Software Catalog 2025-26
GNEIMO Advanced Techniques for Constrained Internal  
Coordinate Molecular Dynamics N PO-48712-1
The GNEIMO methods and algorithms build on the Spatial Operator Algebra (SOA) multibody dynamics 
framework. The specific problems addressed in this work are velocity initialization techniques that are 
consistent with the CICMD equipartition principle, techniques for nulling momentum drift, analysis and 
solutions for the flying icecube effect, and performance of integration schemes.
U.S. Government Purpose Release
GPS and Galileo Receiver for the ISS (GARISS) L EW-20096-1
The GARISS waveform implements a GNSS receiver that performs position determination using the L5/
E5a band of the GPS/Galileo satellite constellations. It was operated in a space environment on the SCaN 
testbed platform aboard the ISS. The waveform takes L-band input as one bit samples at 38 MHz and uses 
FPGA and CPU processing to implement acquisition, tracking, navigation message decoding, and position-
velocity-time (PVT) generation. Signals from both constellations are combined when generating PVT, which 
often leads to better visibility than using a single constellation alone. The computed PVT and other receiver 
metrics are output as telemetry logs.
U.S. Government Purpose Release
GPS Occultation Analysis System (GOAS) N PO-30596-1
GOAS processes atmospheric and ionospheric occultation data obtained from low-Earth-orbiting global 
positioning systems transmission receivers. The technology obtains input from a variety of receiver types 
and satellites and outputs full atmospheric and ionospheric retrievals.
U.S. and Foreign Release
gpsGUI: EFIS-style GPS and IMU Visualization, Logging, and Log-Playback Software  N PO-52170-1
The gpsGUI software provides real-time Electronic Flight Instrument System (EFIS) style visualization of GPS 
and IMU data coming over a binary TCP/IP stream. gpsGUI that can be used as a stand-alone graphical 
program, or various pieces can be incorporated into existing codebases using standard C++ interfaces. 
The software is written with an emphasis on thread-safe real-time operation and is designed for critical 
operations where corrupted or missed data would not be tolerable.
Open Source
Grand Canyon Regions of Drought Impact (GC-ReDI) L AR-19017-1
Beginning in 1998, a drought in the Southwestern United States caused water levels in Lake Mead to fall 
to historic lows, uncovering thousands of acres of lakebed sediment along the shoreline. This software 
quantifies and visualizes the decreasing water levels and land cover changes in the lower Grand Canyon as 
it provides images, statistics, and graphs to understand these changes.
Open Source
Graphical Utility for Icy moon Surface Simulations (GUISS) N PO-52911-1
The software is a simulation framework that generates photo-realistic imagery of terrain from icy moons 
such as Enceladus and Europa. The simulation is versatile and can provide imagery over a wide range 
of visual hypotheses of the terrains of these moons with respect to terrain roughness, texture variation, 
photometric properties, and illumination. The simulation was developed with information from existing 
scientific literature about the terrains of these icy moons.
General Public Release
Ground and Space Radar Volume Matching and Comparison Software G SC-15738-1
This software enables easy comparison of ground- and space-based radar observations for validation 
purposes.
Open Source
=====PAGE 68=====
Data and Image Processing
59
NASA Technology Transfer Program  Software Catalog 2025-26
Growler ARC-15690-1
Growler is a component-oriented framework aimed at distributed and collaborative visualization and 
computational steering. The technology’s distributed object and event architecture is suitable for application 
to high-performance local area network (LAN) environments as well the Internet. Its features include strong 
integration with C++, selective distributed reference counting, and efficient well-typed event channels for 
local as well as remote event broadcast.
Open Source
Harvester of Remote Time-Stamped Data Products  NPO-52290-1
Leveraging an advanced cloud technology stack and ongoing multi-agency pilot efforts being spearheaded 
by NASA, this program provides a next generation data service infrastructure for a more digitally integrated 
ocean observing system in support of marine science and ecosystem-based management as well as 
furthering the use of remote sensing data in multidisciplinary science. This works with existing agency 
repositories to provide more harmonized access to satellite, in-situ, and model data that includes integrated 
data search, visualization, and analytics.
General Public Release
Heat Analysis Manager (HAM)  
a Thermal Desktop API-Based Heat Map Generation Software GSC-18322-1
Heat Analysis Manager (HAM) is a Thermal Desktop (TD) based free multi-purpose tool developed to aid 
thermal engineers in analyzing thermal models which includes a heat map generation utility. HAM’s heat map 
generator retains accuracy and fast processing speed by utilizing TD’s application programming interface 
(API) and TD’s built-in post-processor routine Qflow from Results. HAM’s heat map output is presented in an 
easily customizable format in Excel, allowing users to create various custom visual heat maps. 
U.S. Release Only
HELM: Hologram Examination for Life-like Motility  NPO-50634-1
These algorithms detect moving objects in holograms produced by a Digital Holographic Microscope 
(DHM), eliminating the majority of computation required for spatial reconstruction. A functional prototype 
that tracks these particles, analyzes their motion, and trains a machine learning classifier to distinguish 
lifelike motility from non-living organic or inorganic particles. There is sufficient speed (limited compute) and 
memory efficiency (limited memory footprint) to enable laptop-based, in-field, real-time processing of the 
streaming instrument output leading directly to proposals for an on-board DHM instrument.
Open Source
Hierarchical Data Format-Earth Observing System (HDF-EOS) to NetCDF Converter GSC-15007-1
This C-language computer program accepts a set of scientific data/metadata from an Earth-observing 
system (EOS) satellite and converts it from the format in which it was created and delivered into another 
format for data processing and exchange on Earth. 
Open Source
Highly Scalable Matching Pursuit Signal Decomposition Algorithm (MPD) ARC-16345-1
MPD is a powerful and effective iterative algorithm for signal decomposition and feature extraction. The 
technology decomposes any signal into linear combinations of its dictionary elements or “atoms.” 
Open Source
Hydrological Anomaly Engine (HAE) LAR-19151-1
Using the cloud-based computing power of Google Earth Engine (GEE), the Hydrologic Anomaly Index (HAI) 
is capable of uploading and analyzing large amounts of Earth-observation climate data for the purposes of 
hydrologic analysis and monitoring. The end user can pull from and modify a library of scripts that are stored 
in Earth Engine, as well as upload and access data stored on a private data catalog. 
Open Source
=====PAGE 69=====
Data and Image Processing
60
NASA Technology Transfer Program  Software Catalog 2025-26
Hypatheon-Searchable Database Capability for Formalized Mathematics LAR-18232-1
The Hypatheon suite of software tools provides a searchable database capability for the specialized domain 
of formalized mathematics. The technology is designed to be a companion to a specific tool called PVS, 
which supports an emerging type of advanced software verification intended for safety-critical systems. 
Hypatheon enhances PVS users’ productivity by first indexing the mathematical theories rendered  
in the PVS specification language, then making the contents searchable by an interactive software tool.
Open Source
iMMOD: Interactive Model of Mosquito Distribution LAR-19386-1
This software visualizes NASA Earth observation, citizen science, and public health data relevant to 
mosquito habitat suitability by season. This software also implements a seasonal model to predict habitat 
suitability for mosquitoes in Western Europe.
Open Source
In-situ Data Transformation and Ingestion Software Tool  NPO-52110-1
This generalized tool scans the in-situ netCDF data, selects the variables of interest together with 
associated coordinate data, and transforms/exports them into a columnar format (such as CSV file format) 
that can then easily be assimilated in other COVERAGE software tools and services. The tool also allows 
for and undertakes necessary standardization and reconciliation of data variable names consistent with 
CF-standard names as necessary for output. The generalized in-situ data transformation and ingestion tool 
is currently used to extract SPURS data (which is in the netCDF format) via the PODAAC api and is loaded 
as python data frame and then exported to a CSV file.
Open Source
Inductive Monitoring System (IMS), Version 5:  
System Health-Monitoring Software That Learns System Behavior from Data ARC-15058-1A
IMS software utilizes techniques from the fields of model-based reasoning, machine learning, and data 
mining to build system monitoring knowledge bases from archived or simulated sensor data. The technology 
automatically analyzes the nominal system data to form general classes of expected system sensor values; 
these classes are used to build a monitoring knowledge base. When monitoring a system, IMS simply 
checks to see how well the incoming sensor data fit into the classes derived from the training data.
U.S. Government Purpose Release
Inference Kernel for Open Static (IKOS) Analyzers:  
A High-Performance Static Analysis Engine to Build Automated Code  
Analysis Tools for the Formal Verification of Critical Software Properties ARC-16789-1
IKOS is a kernel for the construction of open-static analyzers based on Patrick Cousot and Radhia Cousot’s 
theory of abstract interpretation, which states that computations can be abstracted and reduced to a 
generalized set of objects and still exhibit the same critical properties of the parent program. By reducing 
the set of objects through abstraction, IKOS is scalable to large complex computer programs and presents 
a sound approach to verification of such programs. 
Open Source
InSAR Processor for ALOS-2 Multi-mode SAR Data and Ionospheric Correction  NPO-50616-1
This software implements the InSAR processing of ALOS-2 multi-mode SAR data and InSAR ionospheric 
correction based on the JPLs ISCE software. Like ISCE, the parameters are mainly handled by python 
programs, while image processing are mainly done by C or Fortran programs. When available, the basic 
modules of ISCE are called to do the processing. Therefore, the high processing efficiency of ISCE is 
inherited. ALOS-2 has many acquisition modes and different wavelengths. The unique feature of one app to 
support all can facilitate both the users and the maintenance of the software.
Open Source
=====PAGE 70=====
Data and Image Processing
61
NASA Technology Transfer Program  Software Catalog 2025-26
InSAR Scientific Computing Environment, Version 2  NPO-48344-1
ISCE version 2 provides an integrated processing and visualization computing environment that allows 
users of interferometric synthetic aperture radar data from a variety of space-borne sensors to process from 
Level-0 to Level-4 products.
Open Source
Instrument Software Framework (ISF) Software Component Architectural Framework  NPO-49404-1
This software implements a very compact reusable software framework based on a software component 
architecture. It includes a code generator for producing C++ component base classes by implementing the 
domain-specific logic. It interconnects components, starts threads of execution, and sends invocations 
between components. It also provides the ability to serialize and deserialize invocations for multi-processor 
or memory space interactions. The user specifies interfaces, components and topologies in XML, and uses 
the code generator to generate ports and components. The components are instantiated at runtime and 
interconnected. The framework and generated code are designed to use a portable, embeddable subset of 
C++.
Open Source
Interactive Data Analyzer and Reviewer for Machine Learning Systems  NPO-51147-1
The framework is extremely lightweight and flexible to be expanded to adapt for almost any data related 
interactions in machine learning systems. The tools included in the framework not only aim to provide 
deeper insights into the system to machine learning experts, but also are key components for the goal to 
operationalize machine learning systems.
Open Source
Introduction of Collaborative State Estimation for Multiple Agents  
into a Thermal/Visual-Inertial State Estimation Framework  NPO-52198-1
This software is a modification to the X framework that enables multi robot collaboration. It adds a 
communication class that enables the program to exchange messages with other agents in the network. It 
extends the MSCKF update class to work with collaborative MSCKF updates, by using the new Covariance 
Intersection class. It implements a multi SLAM class to handle collaborative SLAM updates. Moreover, to 
use the data coming from the other robots the program implements a place recognition class that creates 
the messages needed by the collaborative update methods. The software also includes a third-party code, 
slightly modified to perform photometric calibration of thermal images.
General Public Release
Ionospheric Slant TEC Analysis Using GPS-Based Estimation (IonoSTAGE) NPO-43504-1
The Ionospheric Slant TEC Analysis Using GNSS-Based Estimation (IonoSTAGE) software package is a 
MATLAB platform for performing analysis and visualization of ionospheric slant total electron content (TEC) 
using measurements of global navigation satellite systems.
U.S. Government Purpose Release
iOS Barcode Scanner framework  NPO-52208-1
The framework is a high-performance barcode scanner implementation that scans any iOS supported 
barcode formats. It uses the system Vision framework to recognize a broad set of formats, from linear 
UPC barcodes to 2D patterns like QR codes. By using the native iOS Vision framework, the performance is 
hardware-accelerated and improves with each new generation of chips in iPhones and iPads.
Open Source
IPv6 Python Extension Module LEW-19323-1
IPv6 Extension module for Python allows a user to enable IPv6 features not yet available for any Python 
versions. It allows for IPv6 flow labels to be enabled for a given Python socket object.
Open Source
=====PAGE 71=====
Data and Image Processing
62
NASA Technology Transfer Program  Software Catalog 2025-26
ISS Camera Geolocate MFS-33558-1
This Python software library facilitates the geolocation of photographs and video frames from the 
International Space Station (ISS). It provides functions that take camera and pointing information along  
with publicly available ISS position information to geolocate every pixel of the photograph in latitude and 
longitude. The library enables geospatial analysis of astronaut photography from Earth, including pictures  
of clouds, lightning, coastlines, city lights, etc. 
Open Source
ISS Explorer  MSC-26452-1
The ISS Explorer is an interactive application which allows the user to view a 3D model of the International 
Space Station, rotate it, zoom into it, and select different parts and pieces.  Descriptive information about 
each piece can be viewed. Parts can be turned on or off, labels can be turned on or off, and parts can be 
made transparent to allow for additional viewing.
General Public Release
Java Pathfinder Core System (JPF-Core) ARC-17487-1
JPF-Core, is a model checker for Java bytecode. The technology takes a binary Java program and executes 
it in a user-configurable way to detect defects such as deadlocks and unhandled exceptions, providing 
significantly higher confidence in correct program behavior than conventional testing.
Open Source
Java Program to Promote an Open-Source E Standard for Mass Properties Engineering LAR-17635-1
This open-source Java software helps develop electronic standards (E-Standards) for mass properties 
engineering. An E-Standard is a highly descriptive dataset that includes standardizing functions for data 
manipulation, interrogation, and formatting. With this tool, any number of users can interface with the 
proposed E-Standard datasets and still seamlessly utilize their own software methods.
Open Source
Java-Based Software Tool for Dynamic Aerospace Vehicle Exchange Markup Files LAR-17460-1
An update to software originally named DAVEtools 0.5, this software-based technology is used for 
manipulating standard Dynamic Aerospace Vehicle Exchange Markup Language (DAVE-ML) models. The 
improved technology embeds the necessary initialization data into a data structure to keep the MATLAB 
workspace uncluttered and creates Simulink models from a generated MATLAB script.
Open Source
Javascript Implementation for Rendering 3D Tiles in Three.js  NPO-51486-1
This program implements a renderer for the open-source 3D Tiles format in the web for three.js which is 
being used to represent Mars terrain for operations tools.
Open Source
Javascript Implementation of CAHVORE Camera and Image Transformation Utilities  NPO-52459-1
This is a series of packages for visualizing and rendering images and frustum shapes based on CAHVORE 
camera models as well as loading SGI and PGM images in three.js.
General Public Release
JPEG Image Compression Software with improved Safety NPO-52154-1
This program performs lossy compression and decompression of images with increased safety compared 
to previous software.
Open Source
=====PAGE 72=====
Data and Image Processing
63
NASA Technology Transfer Program  Software Catalog 2025-26
JWST Backgrounds GSC-17919-1
For use in proposal planning, this simple Python program predicts the levels of background emission that 
will appear in JWST observations. It accesses a precompiled background cache that is already hosted 
online for JWST users. 
Open Source
Kawin: A Kampmann-Wagner Numerical (KWN)  
Phase Precipitation and Coarsening Modeling Code  NPO-52029-1
Kawin is an open-source Python library for simulating precipitation behavior in alloys using the Kampmann-
Wagner Numerical (KWN) model coupled with Calphad-based thermodynamics. The Calphad coupling 
is done through the open-source PyCalphad software, which allows for the usage of .TDB databases 
for thermodynamic and mobility parameters. However, this package also allows the user the define their 
own thermodynamic calculations. Methods for creating surrogate models on top of the thermodynamic 
calculations are also introduced in this package, which can greatly reduce computational time. The usage 
of surrogate models expands the applications of the KWN model by allowing for quicker exploration and/or 
calibration of model parameters and incorporation into larger scale simulations.
Open Source
Kepler Robovetter ARC-17981-1
The Kepler mission observed approximately 200,000 stars for four years and identified over 34,000 
transit-like events. The Kepler Robovetter translates the logic used to discriminate between “likely planet 
candidates” and “false positives” and automates the evaluation of large Kepler data sets that are available 
at the public archive. SETI Institutes had a primary role in authoring and producing the Kepler Robovetter 
under Cooperative Agreement number NNX13AD01A.
Open Source
Kepler Science Data Processing Pipeline  ARC-16332-1A
The Data Processing Pipeline is a central element of the Kepler Ground Data System. It analyzes stellar 
photometric data from the Kepler spacecraft and reports search results for planets within the Kepler 
photometric dataset. The pipeline performs pixel-level calibration, photometric analysis, systematic error 
correction, transiting planet detection, modeling and diagnostic testing of potential transit signatures,  
attitude determination, stellar target management, and monitoring of instrument health and performance.
Open Source
Kepler/K2 Cadence Events (K2CE) ARC-18415-1
K2CE is a data visualization/manipulation Python application which runs on publicly available data from 
the NASA Kepler, K2, and TESS missions to produce annotated light curve plots and, optionally, filtered 
versions of the input data files.
Open Source
Kepler Planet Occurrence Rate Tools (KeplerPORTs) ARC-17979-1
The Kepler Plotting Program was developed as an aid to understanding the publicly available data files that 
have been released by the Kepler project. This tool allows end users to reproduce plots utilized in project 
documentation, facilitates the user’s scientific understanding, and promotes the utilization of the Kepler 
science data products. SETI Institutes had a primary role in authoring and producing the KeplerPORTs 
under Cooperative Agreement number NNX13AD01A.
Open Source
KML_outline and KML_overlay NPO-52397-1
The KML_outline and KML_overlay programs generate KML files of airborne 4-band imagery overlays and 
imagery  outlines.
General Public Release
=====PAGE 73=====
Data and Image Processing
64
NASA Technology Transfer Program  Software Catalog 2025-26
Knowledge Acquisition and Synthesis  
for Information Model Driven Architectures (CornerStone)  NPO-49832-1
This framework uses established requirements and best-practices for long-term digital repositories to create 
an information model for a set of one or several related domains in a community. The information model is 
subsequently used to configure the functional components of an information model-driven architecture. 
The result is an information system that meets the information requirements levied on the system by the 
community.
Open Source
Kodiak: A Software Library for Verifying Nonlinear Arithmetic Statements LAR-18268-1
Kodiak is a software implementation of an algorithm for verifying expressions involving nonlinear real 
arithmetic. It includes an optimizer for nonlinear real functions, a solver for nonlinear inequalities, and an 
application programming interface (API) for integrating other software verification tools.
Open Source
Kodiak’s Boolean Checker Software Module LAR-19222-1
Kodiak is a software implementation of a branch-and-bound algorithm for rigorous approximations of 
expressions involving nonlinear real arithmetic. It includes an optimizer for nonlinear real functions, a solver 
for nonlinear inequalities, and an application programming interface to integrate directly with other software 
verification tools. Kodiak’s Boolean Checker Software Module is an implementation of a general mixed 
Boolean/real-expression checker that is integrated into Kodiak’s global optimization solver.
Open Source
Kontest: A tool for Scenario-Based Software Testing  NPO-50601-1
Kontest is a new tool for automated software testing. It provides convenient syntax allowing a developer to 
write test scenarios that can describe broad classes of tests. Scenarios can be as simple as an ordinary 
unit test with added parameters that can take a range of values, but can also include nondeterministic 
sequences of actions with temporal or other constraints (the notation is still under development). Given a 
scenario, Kontest automatically refines it into thousands of concrete tests, using dynamic program analysis 
to find realizations of the scenario that will trigger different execution paths through the program under test.
Open Source
LAGER: Light-weight Accumulator Gathering Efficiently in Real-time MSC-26455-1
LAGER is a reliable software logging system designed to allow multiple logging sources to log to multiple 
end users.
Open Source
Large-Scale Autonomous Mapping and Positioning (LAMP)  NPO-51451-1
LAMP is a complete package for Simultaneous Localization and Mapping (SLAM) that is adaptable to a 
large range of robotic systems for exploration of unknown indoor and underground environments. LAMP will 
process sensor inputs, such as lidar scans, IMU, and odometry estimates, and produce an accurate global 
location, global map, and global pose-graph. This capability is also extended to multi-robot system, through 
a centralized fusion of pose-graphs with low data-rate communications of sparse pose-graph information. 
This modular architecture can have modules adapted to include different information in the global pose-
graph to leverage what sensing information is available for maximum localization accuracy. LAMP runs in 
the ROS ecosystem.
Open Source
=====PAGE 74=====
Data and Image Processing
65
NASA Technology Transfer Program  Software Catalog 2025-26
Land Cover Change Detection Tool (LCD) LAR-19235-1
This is a script within Google Earth Engine (GEE) that is able to analyze study areas for significant vegetation 
change and incorporates ancillary datasets that allow the user to evaluate possible causation of this loss 
or gain. The Normalized Difference Vegetation Index (NDVI) for the study time period is calculated and then 
compared to the maximum and minimum NDVI from a baseline range of years in order to calculate Relative 
Greenness (RG). The change in RG from the previous year is found, and this allows the user to identify 
abrupt change in vegetation. On a date input by the user, the map viewer displays the RG, the change in 
RG, the percent change in RG, and the NBR, along with the cropland layer from that year and NAIP imagery 
taken closest in time to the requested display date.
Open Source
Land Surface Temperature MODIS Visualization (LaSTMoV) LAR-18877-1
Extreme heat causes and exacerbates a number of health problems leading to hospitalization and death 
in some cases. The problem of severe heat is notably felt in Maricopa County, Arizona, where the socially 
disadvantaged and physically vulnerable are especially susceptible to the effects of extreme heat. Several 
organizations, including the Arizona Department of Health Services and the Phoenix Heat Relief Network, 
are working to create more effectively placed cooling centers and heat warning systems to aid those 
with the highest risk of exposure. This project created a Python tool using Aqua Moderate Resolution 
Imaging Spectrometer (MODIS) land surface temperature parameters to generate heat maps that reference 
demographics data on extremely hot days.
Open Source
Land Use Classification Tool (LUCT) LAR-19197-1
Uses the Google Earth Engine Code interface to create a classification of land use on the United States 
Virgin Islands (USVI) under six classes: water, low density residential, high-density residential, forest/shrub, 
agriculture, and barren. The final product is at a 30 meter spatial scale.
Open Source
Lightweight Onboard Doppler Compensation for Satellite Communications LEW-20430-1
This VHDL module runs on a spacecraft’s software-defined radio to reduce the effects of Doppler on 
wireless commnuications. The module implements a linear frequency sweep in the opposite direction of 
predicted Doppler shift to null out its effects on transmitted or received signals. Designed with resource-
constrained transceivers in mind, minimal FPGA resources (e.g. less than 1% of Virtex 7 resources) are 
used.
U.S. Release Only
LithoSphere: A tiled, 3D Planetary Web-Based GIS Library  NPO-52010-1
Lithosphere is a web-based 3D visualization tool capable of rendering raster and vector open-source 
planetary datasets. The software supports viewing any spherical planetary body (Earth, Mars, Europa, etc.) 
in three dimensions including both raster and vector datasets. It is a standalone web-based viewer that 
supports open-source formats like Tile Map Service (TMS), 3D tiles, meshes, and GeoJSON formats. It 
supports mapping 2D vectors to the 3D surface or rendering vectors using their own 3D coordinates. This 
software does not rely on commercial data providers.
Open Source
Lossless Hyper-/Multi-Spectral Data Compression Software GSC-15992-1
This software performs lossless hyper-spectral and multi-spectral data compression.
Open Source
=====PAGE 75=====
Data and Image Processing
66
NASA Technology Transfer Program  Software Catalog 2025-26
lowfssim: Integrated Model of the LOWFS System  
on the Roman Coronagraph Instrument  NPO-52083-1
lowfssim is the official model of the LOWFS/C system on the Roman Coronagraph Instrument. It is a model 
of the system including sensor and actuators. The model is used to form CBEs on mission requirements and 
validate testbed experiments. Ad-hoc questions about the system and more generally integrated modeling 
inquiries are answered using the model.
Open Source
LSTM-based Anomaly Detection System for Spacecraft Telemetry  NPO-50838-1
This program detects anomalies in spacecraft telemetry using fully-automated machine learning-based 
approaches.
Open Source
Lunasynth Software NPO-53275-1
This software creates and renders synthetic terrains of the moon. It enhances a given Digital Elevation Map 
(DEM) with a statistical distribution model of rocks and craters. It can render the terrain using physics-based 
lighting.
General Public Release
Machine Learning Test and Evaluation for Learning with Less Labels (LwLL)  NPO-51578-1
The Learning with Less Labels (LwLL) machine learning test and evaluation toolkit automatically generates 
an environment to test, graph, and collect metrics about machine learning software. The purpose is to 
quantitatively assess a performer (institution) and their machine learning code to evaluate whether they are 
using orders of magnitude less data for machine learning while not sacrificing accuracy.
Open Source
Mariana: Text Classification System ARC-16070-1
Mariana is an algorithm that efficiently optimizes the hyperparameters for support vector machines for 
regression and classification. It currently uses simulated annealing for optimization but can be extended to 
use a variety of stochastic optimization techniques, including Markov Chain Monte Carlo, Sequential Monte 
Carlo, and genetic algorithms. 
Open Source
Mars Target Encyclopedia (MTE)  NPO-50498-1
The Mars Target Encyclopedia (MTE) contains compositional information about Mars surface targets. The 
information was automatically extracted from scientific publications. Users can search for all targets that 
contain an element (e.g., calcium) or mineral (e.g., hematite) and see a map view of their spatial locations. 
They can also look up information about a specific target of interest (e.g., Dillinger) to browse previous 
findings about its composition. All information in the MTE is linked to the source publication from which it 
was extracted, so users can easily browse the full context in the original document. 
Open Source
Marsh Remote Sensing Health Evaluation (MaRSHE) LAR-19211-1
This tool includes three general types of scripts: one for extracting average NDVI values from Landsat 5 
and Landsat 8 image collections for specified reference dates (typically a period of 10 to 15 years), another 
for performing unsupervised classifications to determine marsh extent for a variety of years, and a third for 
statistics regarding the maps generated in the classification scripts. 
Open Source
=====PAGE 76=====
Data and Image Processing
67
NASA Technology Transfer Program  Software Catalog 2025-26
MATLAB-Code V Toolkit GSC-15140-1
This toolkit is a set of MATLAB scripts and functions that enable rapid transfer of optical system and 
performance data from Code V optical software into the MATLAB environment. Typical applications include: 
extracting prescription data into MATLAB to confirm consistency of various delivered models, perturbing 
the models and performing various analyses such as ray tracing or generation of point-spread functions 
in support of integrated modeling activities, and enabling a MATLAB-driven optical model for integrated 
system-level modeling of wavefront sensing and control. 
Open Source
MATLAB-Oslo Toolkit GSC-15138-1
This toolkit is a set of MATLAB scripts and functions that enable rapid transfer of optical system and 
performance data from Oslo optical software into the MATLAB environment. Typical applications include: 
extracting prescription data into MATLAB to confirm consistency of various delivered models; perturbing 
the models and performing various analyses in support of integrated modeling activities; and enabling a 
MATLAB-driven optical model for integrated system-level modeling of wavefront sensing and control. 
Open Source
MATLAB-Zemax Toolkit GSC-15151-1
The MATLAB-Zemax toolkit is a set of MATLAB scripts and functions that enable rapid transfer of optical 
system and performance data from Zemax optical software into the MATLAB environment. Typical 
applications include: extracting prescription data into MATLAB to confirm consistency of various delivered 
models; perturbing the models and performing various analyses in support of integrated modeling 
activities; and enabling a MATLAB-driven optical model for integrated system-level modeling of wavefront 
sensing and control. 
Open Source
Metadata Extract and Access Database (MEAD) GSC-19152-1
MEAD defines a protocol for inserting and querying metadata from multiple database sources to aide in 
data discovery when performing data processing. It also defines an application programming interface (API) 
for interacting with a simple reference implementation of the protocol to demonstrate its usage.
General Public Release
Methane Source Finder Web Application (User Interface and Server) NPO-51093-1
Detect and characterize localized methane and CO2 anomalies that manifest in an intermittent and 
stochastic but with net high magnitude fluxes. Apply machine learning techniques to provide more 
autonomous and lower latency source detection, attribution and process understanding. Automate and 
optimize methane and CO2 analysis workflows to reduce data product latency and improve on-demand 
services including quality control and validation. Develop a regional-scale scale analysis framework that can 
assimilate surface and satellite atmospheric observations and high-resolution weather reanalysis products 
for any region globally. Demonstrate a common data system that facilitates anomaly notification/response, 
data search, discovery, fusion and on-demand analytics.
Open Source
Methods for Detecting Novel Geology in Mastcam Multispectral Observations  NPO-51508-1
This novelty detection is implemented in Python using the Keras and TensorFlow machine learning libraries. 
A dataset of Mastcam multispectral images and selected known examples of novel observations to evaluate 
the novelty detection performance is included. This program trains autoencoders using a loss function that 
explicitly captures spatial properties in the input (e.g., structural similarity index). It also characterizes the 
influence of the autoencoder loss function on the type of novel features that can be detected.
Open Source
=====PAGE 77=====
Data and Image Processing
68
NASA Technology Transfer Program  Software Catalog 2025-26
MiniWall: Data Visualization Web Browser Application ARC-18270-1
This is a browser-based software used to analyze and understand large and small computationally and 
experimentally generated data sets. The MiniWall software presents a matrix view of plots and other 
visualization images and provides a responsive and productive way to investigate the data from it. Because 
it’s browser based, it runs on any computer or device that can display a web page. It can also be used 
remotely and securely by using web server software.
Open Source
MISR Geometric Calibration Software  NPO-20999-1
This software is part of NASA’s Earth Science Enterprise (Code Y). MISR is part of the EOS Terra mission.  
Terra is one of several EOS missions.  EOS is the centerpiece of Code Y work.  A more thorough description 
of this software can be found in the MISR Science Data Processing Functional Design Document (D-12941A).
General Public Release
Model-Driven, Science Data Product Registration Service NPO-47832-1
The Planetary Data System (PDS) overhauled the PDS data architecture (e.g., data model, data structures, 
data dictionary, etc.) and deployed a software system (online data services, distributed data catalog, 
etc.) that fully embraces the PDS federation as an integrated system while leveraging modern information 
technology.  The CCSDS Reference Model in turn relies heavily on the Electronic Business using eXtensible 
Markup Language (ebXML) standards for registry services and the registry information model, managed by 
the OASIS consortium.
Open Source
Modified Snowmelt Runoff Model (M-SRM) for Forecasting Water Availability in Chile  LAR-18602-1
Modified Snowmelt Runoff Model (M-SRM) for Forecasting Water Availability in Chile models daily stream 
flow of snowmelt runoff as a function of temperature, elevation, snow-covered area, precipitation rate, 
and experimentally determined coefficients. Using MODIS and TRMM data, the software provides tools 
for synthesizing daily fractional snow cover and daily precipitation measurements. M-SRM provides daily 
stream flow estimates for three months beyond the start of the growing season.
Open Source
Move Away Superfluous Clouds (MASC) LAR-19032-1
This source code removes clouds, cloud shadow, water, and snow pixels from Landsat scenes using the 
cloud mask layer that is provided with Landsat data.
Open Source
MPS Editor NPO-47237-1
The MPS editor is written in Java using the Eclipse Rich Client Platform. The software allows users to start 
in the early development phase and continue on through the operations phases. It is currently built with four 
perspectives: the activity dictionary perspective, the project adaptation perspective, the sequence building 
perspective, and the sequence modeling perspective. 
U.S. Government Purpose Release
mrcal: A Toolkit to Precisely Solve Calibration and Structure-from-Motion Problems  NPO-51600-1
Mrcal contains a C library for 3D geometry operations and lens projection/unprojection operations, 
supporting many camera models, including JPL-specific versions that no other programs support. Functions 
report the values and the gradients related to input variables. The optimization solves for the geometry of 
the world, cameras, lens parameters, and/or for the shape of the object being observed. The Python library 
to read/write camera models from/to disk and to manipulate them. Additional tools allow the user to quickly 
process their data. 
Open Source
=====PAGE 78=====
Data and Image Processing
69
NASA Technology Transfer Program  Software Catalog 2025-26
mrcam: A Toolkit for Camera Preview, Logging, and Replay Using Aravis  NPO-53286-1
Mrcam allows users to read images from genicam cameras, to control the various camera parameters, to 
log the data produced by the camera, and to replay those logs. Mrcam provides both prebuilt tools and 
libraries that could be utilized to build new applications. The prebuilt tools shipped in the distribution are the 
preview/log/replay tool and a “focus” tool to get live feedback about image sharpness to let the user focus a 
camera with immediate feedback.
General Public Release
MRSDS: Methane Research Science Data System  NPO-52074-1
This Multi-scale Methane Analytic Framework (M2AF) addresses one of the more persistent challenges in 
Earth System Science: understanding the causes for the changing atmospheric growth rate of methane. 
M2AF extends existing methane analysis systems beyond experimental states, reduces latency, and 
reduces the cost of methane data. This program brings together multiple observational data sets, models, 
and analysis methods to estimate methane fluxes across overlapping spatial scales in order to disentangle 
confounding processes.
Open Source
Multidecadal Satellite Record of Water Vapor, Temperature,  
Clouds, and Atmospheric Moist Processes NPO-52383-1
The MEaSUREs projects are focused on product generation, availability, and utility of Earth System Data 
Records (ESDRs). An ESDR is defined as a unified and coherent set of observations of a given parameter of 
the Earth system, which is optimized to meet specific requirements in addressing science questions. These 
data records are critical to understanding Earth System processes and in assessing variability, long-term 
trends, and change in the Earth System as well as providing means for input and validation to modeling 
efforts. Emphasis is placed on linking together multiple satellites into a constellation, developing the means 
of utilizing a multitude of data sources to form coherent time series, and facilitating the use of extensive data 
in the development of comprehensive Earth system models. 
Open Source
Multi-Mission Algorithm and Analytics Platform (MAAP)  NPO-50982-1
The purpose of the joint NASA/ESA Multi-Mission Algorithm and Analysis Platform (MAAP) is to maximize 
the use of Earth observational data in an open and collaborative environment. The project uses data from 
the BIOMASS, GEDI, and NISAR missions, which represent a highly complementary set of measurements to 
determine Earths above ground woody biomass with the goal of functioning as a general purpose platform 
for analyzing Earth science data. For the first time, MAAP enables efficient and tailorable comparisons, 
cross calibration, and fusion of data from these missions for a broad community of scientists and other 
users.
Open Source
Multi-Mission Geographic Information System (MMGIS):  
A Spatial Data Infrastructure for Planetary Missions  NPO-50389-1
This multi-mission geographic information system (MMGIS) creates a planetary mission spatial data 
infrastructure (SDI) with geospatial data standards, tools, and interfaces for accessing science instrument 
data on a map in near-real time. Automated the localization/georeferenced science data products and a 
unified mapping interface to visualization and querying spatial and quantitative data from multiple sources 
are included.
Open Source
=====PAGE 79=====
Data and Image Processing
70
NASA Technology Transfer Program  Software Catalog 2025-26
Multi-Scale Three-Dimensional Variational Data Assimilation (MS-DVAR)  
System for Coastal Ocean Prediction NPO-47768-1
This multi-scale three-dimensional variational data assimilation scheme (MS-3DVAR) software is for high 
resolution coastal ocean models, assimilating simultaneously and effectively sparse vertical profiles and 
high-resolution surface measurements, and constrains forward-model biases. In this system, the cost 
function is decomposed into two separate units for the large and small-scale components, respectively.
Open Source
Multivariate Time Series Search Capability  
to Identify Complex Patterns in Large Datasets ARC-16452-1
This software allows the user to specify a time series over multiple variables to search massive datasets. 
The tool returns a list of events (a time series) from the database that spans multiple variables and within 
a threshold distance from the query. Experiments on numerous real aviation datasets demonstrated the 
algorithm’s capability to uncover potential aircraft safety events (as validated by multiple aviation safety 
experts and airlines). 
Open Source
MYSTRAN GSC-17173-1
MYSTRAN is a finite element analysis (FEA) processor that takes NASTRAN data decks as input and 
processes them to generate results files.
Open Source
NASA App ARC-16325-1A
The NASA App delivers near-real-time NASA content to phones and tablets. The technology features 
missions, images, videos, tweets, a live stream of NASA TV, and news topics.
General Public Release
NASA Assurance Standards Workflow Assistant (ANASWA) NPO-51913-1
The purpose of this software is to show, by means of an operational (albeit incomplete) prototype, 
the feasibility of software that would help missions develop a Safety and Mission Assurance Plan that 
complies with NASA standards (and others, if relevant, e.g., OSHA). As a side-effect of its creation, it 
brings to bear considerations of clarity, consistency, and completeness upon the NASA documentation 
from which it draws its information.
Open Source
NASA PDS: NSSDCA Delivery Software  NPO-51496-1
NSSDCA Delivery Tool is responsible for the generation of two information packages for ensuring the 
integrity of the archive with respect to the NSSDCA and Open Archival Information System (OAIS) reference 
model. The packages are intended to be generated by Discipline Node staff any time new data is released 
into the PDS, but can also be executed retroactively for data that has not previously been submitted. 
Once generated, the archive information package and submission package are both validated by the PDS 
engineering node, and the submission package is delivered to the NSSDCA. The two packages are the 
archive information package and submission information package.
Open Source
=====PAGE 80=====
Data and Image Processing
71
NASA Technology Transfer Program  Software Catalog 2025-26
NASA Vision Workbench (VW), Version 3 A RC-15761-1A
Vision Workbench (VW) is a modular, extensible computer vision framework that supports a range of 
tasks, including automated science and engineering analysis, large satellite image processing, and 2D/3D 
environment reconstruction. The framework provides a rapid C++ development environment, as well as a 
flexible, multi-platform system to deploy computer vision applications. The module interface allows new 
capabilities to be rapidly integrated, and the dataflow architecture allows image-processing pipelines to be 
quickly developed and reconfigured. 
Open Source
Networked Belief-Aware Perceptual Autonomy (NeBula) NP O-52184-1
This software leverages open-source modules and software from the ROS (Robot Operating System) 
community and glues them together to build an overall autonomy stack for specific robot platforms. This 
overall software allows the robot to navigate between simple obstacles.
Open Source
Neural Network Emulation of VSWIR Atmospheric Radiative Transfer Models  N PO-50675-1
This program uses a pure spectroscopic approach to improve atmospheric inversion accuracy to minimize 
regional biases in global-scale investigations. This software offers swift execution of line-by-line Radiative 
Transfer (RT) models. Neural Network (NN) emulation can replicate the results of the MODTRAN 6.0 line-
by-line A-band model to high accuracy and a five order of magnitude improvement in execution time. This  
provides a significant improvement in the accuracy and modeling power of VSWIR atmospheric correction.
Open Source
New Statistical Trajectory Estimation Program (NewSTEP) L AR-19345-1
NewSTEP is a MATLAB-based iterative extended Kalman filter/smoother designed for solving trajectory 
reconstruction problems. The filter blends various measurement data to obtain the best estimate of the 
vehicle trajectory and aerodynamics. The equations of motion include the effects of several systematic 
error sources, whose values may also be estimated by the filter. The measurement models include Inertial 
Measurement Units, Global Positioning System, ground-based tracking radar, magnetometers, air data 
sensors, and meteorological measurements.
U.S. and Foreign Release
NFER: A Notation and System for Inferring Event Stream Abstractions  N PO-50406-1
NFER provides a rule-based notation and system for labeling event streams. The result of a labeling is a 
set of intervals: named sections of the event stream, each including a start time, and end time, and a map 
holding data selected from the events and sub-intervals making up the interval. Typically intervals are built 
on top of intervals, forming a hierarchy of abstractions. The result can be visualized, and can generally 
help engineers to better comprehend the structure of an event stream. The NFER system is implemented 
as an internal Scala DSL. Each interval-generating rule spawns an actor, that subscribes to events and/or 
sub-intervals, and publishes new intervals in the publish/subscribe architecture. The software can process 
events online, as they come down to ground from the spacecraft, as well as events produced at an earlier 
point in time, and stored in a database.
Open Source
NISAR Science Notebooks  NP O-51956-1
The NISAR Science Team developed algorithms described in the Algorithm Theoretical Basis Documents 
(ATBD) and implemented as Jupyter Notebooks. The Jupyter Notebooks were tested with representative 
NISAR data (e.g., UAVSAR-NISAR simulated data or Sentinel-1 data). Notebooks will be shared with the JPL 
NISAR Project.
Open Source
=====PAGE 81=====
Data and Image Processing
72
NASA Technology Transfer Program  Software Catalog 2025-26
nu-Anomica (Previously Sparse One-Class Support Vector Machines (SOC-SVMs)) A RC-16346-1
nu-Anomica is an anomaly detector that can run faster than traditional OC-SVMs. The technology can 
handle large training sets and works with a well-defined target function. The program utilizes the OSU  
SVMs code (which is a MATLAB version of Lib-SVMs) as the baseline.
Open Source
OCO-2 Level 2 Retrieval Algorithm N PO-49044-1
The primary purpose of the Level 2 retrieval software is to derive estimates of the column-averaged  
atmospheric CO2 dry air mole fraction, XCO2 (defined as the ratio of the column abundances of CO2  
and the column abundance of dry air), and other Level 2 data products from the spectra returned by the 
OCO-2 mission.
Open Source
ODL to XML Converter G SC-15013-1
This command-line Java-based utility converts an ODL Hierarchical Data Format-Earth Observing Satellite 
(HDFEOS) metadata file to an HDFEOS XML file. The tool utilizes an all-Java ODL library that includes a 
syntax and grammar parser. 
OIIP Data Viewer  NP O-50897-1
The Oceanographic In-Situ Interoperability Project integrates diverse in-situ datasets with related 
remote sensing products from NASA. The data viewer is the web application through which users can 
explore and interrogate the range of data available within this project. The application reveals the multi-
dimensional facets of in-situ data at full data resolution. It provides a coherent search interface that 
accommodates the heterogeneity of in-situ products and sophisticated charting options that provide 
granular control over data displays.
Open Source
OMG Tool Infrastructure Working Group Workflow Automation  
and Modeling Tool Extensions NP O-49757-1
The Jet Propulsion Laboratory led the production of official machine-readable artifacts for several cycles of 
the official task forces that develop the Unified Modeling Language (UML) and Systems Modeling Language 
(SysML) specification standards published by the Object Management Group (OMG). This technology 
captures various tools for replacing labor-intensive manual workflows typically involved in standards 
development at the OMG with automated workflow processes.
U.S. Government Purpose Release
Onboard Coaddition of Multiple Image Frames  
to Increase Signal-to-Noise Ratio and Facilitate Target Tracking  N PO-50487-1
This software is part of the agile science framework and the Near Earth Asteroid Scout (NEAScout) 
CubeSat flight software. The purpose of this software is to automatically increase the signal-to-noise ratio 
of image data, acquired by a spacecraft, without the need for data downlink. This is accomplished by 
taking multiple images, in rapid succession, and merging the data between these frames together, while 
accounting for instrument jitter and other intermediate effects. Increasing the signal-to-noise ratio also 
eliminates single image artifacts, like cosmic rays, which results in a higher fidelity product for subsequent 
processing. This process creates a single data product, representing the data from multiple image 
frames. This product can then be downlinked with a fraction of the bandwidth of the original, or further 
processed onboard the spacecraft.
Open Source
=====PAGE 82=====
Data and Image Processing
73
NASA Technology Transfer Program  Software Catalog 2025-26
OnSight: Multi-Platform Terrain Visualization  
for Science, Engineering, and Public Outreach N PO-50830-1
OnSight allow scientists and engineers to immerse themselves within a reconstruction of the terrain around 
the Curiosity rover. Using an immersive display, OnSight can render a reconstruction of Mars at full scale, 
and allow users to navigate the model by simply walking and looking around. OnSight was developed for the 
context of Mars exploration, but the system provides general capability for visualization and virtual presence 
in a remote environment.
U.S. Government Purpose Release
Open CAESAR Server  NP O-51247-1
Computer Aided Engineering for Systems Architecture (CASER) is a software platform that supports the 
transformation of systems engineering (SE) into a rigorous, integrated, and model-centric practice. It 
supports the definition of a rigorous, multi-disciplinary, and tool-neutral methodology for SE. It adopts 
the semantic web approach of specifying knowledge with ontologies to specify a system architecture 
description. The Open CAESAR Server developed in the Integrated Model-Centric Engineering (IMCE) 
initiative is part of a foundation and ecosystem for experimenting and tackling an increasingly complex 
set of challenges in the modern practice. It uses specialized engineering modeling tools. The functionality 
related to CAESAR integration workflows addresses directed acyclic graphs of processes operating on 
SE information.
Open Source
Open-Sourcing the Odysea Mission Simulator  N PO-52472-1
This software simulates scientific measurements for Odysea, a proposed JPL spaceborne mission that 
measures ocean winds and currents. These simulated measurements include the errors associated with 
the instrument, but not specific details of how these errors are produced or any proprietary/controlled/ITAR 
design details.
General Public Release
OpenSCRUB  NP O-50805-1
OpenSCRUB is an orchestration framework that is used to run and aggregate results from multiple 
static code analysis tools. OpenSCRUB is customizable to the needs of the project, allowing teams to 
tailor execution to meet their needs. OpenSCRUB also allows users to export static analysis results to 
Collaborator in order to perform peer reviews. The end goal of OpenSCRUB is to incorporate static analysis 
results into peer reviews to ensure that all the static analysis findings are addressed and discussed. The 
internal OpenSCRUB GUI can also be used by developers strictly as a viewer for browsing static analysis 
results from multiple sources.
Open Source
Observational Products for End-Users from Remote Sensing  
Analysis Science Data System (OPERA SDS) Software NP O-52101-1
OPERA software is designed to better monitor and forecast the state of the following Earth systems - 
surface water extent, land surface disturbance, and displacement.
Open Source
Orion Optical Navigation Image Processing Software (OpNAV) M SC-26456-1
Key components of this software are processing images and producing navigation measurements. The 
software is as an application within the Core Flight Software of the Orion camera controller module.
U.S. Release Only
=====PAGE 83=====
Data and Image Processing
74
NASA Technology Transfer Program  Software Catalog 2025-26
Palm Oil Plantation Predictor (POPP) L AR-18862-1
This software is designed to simplify the process of manipulating and converting both satellite data and 
ancillary data so that they can be used within the Maxent modeling software. The tool converts vector or raster 
data into the correct format and processes all files in order to have identical rows, columns, and resolution.
Open Source
PDS Archive Inventory and Monitoring System (AIMS)  N PO-51132-1
For PDS Cartography and Imaging Science Node, it is critical to know what data is available, where it is 
located in the system, data integrity must be maintained, and the data must be available through the Atlas. 
This software tool provides a more detailed picture of the data, is runnable via the command-line (and also a 
web browser if possible but not required, and has a documented API for the CLI (command-line interface).
Open Source
PDS DOI Service  N PO-51572-1
The PDS Data Object Identifier (DOI) service is responsible for the management of DOIs for the Planetary 
Data System.  Currently, the PDS is attempting to acquire DOIs for any new data sets entering the system. 
This software will help automate the management of those DOIs.
Open Source
PDS Transform Tool  N PO-51240-1
The PDS Transform Tool project contains software for transforming PDS3 and PDS4 product labels and 
product data into common formats more applicable for user applications and scientific research.
Open Source
PDS4 Java Library and Tools  N PO-51130-1
Software for accessing PDS4 data objects including selected transformations to common formats. This 
software is packaged as a Java library with an example driver program and is called by the Validate Tool 
to assist in validation and by the Transform Tool to transform PDS4 products into common formats. The 
PDS4 Tools software was developed using Java and will run on any platform with a supported Java Runtime 
Environment (JRE).
Open Source
Planetary Data System Coincidences (PDSC) N PO-50785-1
The PDSC library allows for quickly querying coincident observations by constructing a set of special 
databases and index structures during the ingestion process. The first database constructed is simply a 
SQL version of the PDS cumulative index. The second set of index structures holds geometric information 
used for coincidence queries.
Open Source
Perilog, Version 3.0 A RC-15310-1
Perilog software capabilities include keyword-in-context search, flexible phrase search, search by example, 
phrase generation, and phrase extraction. The technology’s keyword-in-context search feature retrieves 
documents that contain one or more user-specified keywords in context, ranks documents on their 
relevance to the keywords in context, and displays the documents with the query words highlighted and, 
optionally, with strongly associated words also highlighted.
U.S. Government Purpose Release
=====PAGE 84=====
Data and Image Processing
75
NASA Technology Transfer Program  Software Catalog 2025-26
Photogrammetry Pyramid K SC-14027
The Photogrammetry Pyramid software is a 3D photogrammetry Windows application intended to support 
the use of a stand-alone reference target system. The software requires images from two or more camera 
views. For static scenes, a single camera can be used by taking pictures from different viewpoints (two or 
more). The reference target is composed of seven spheres connected by equal-length rods. A sphere is 
located at each of the four vertices of the pyramid. Three additional spheres are located at the midpoint of 
the three vertical rods. The distance between any set of vertices-spheres defines the characteristic pyramid 
length. This length is the only value needed by the user during reference target generation. 
General Public Release
Physical Scalars and Plotting Tools in Scala A RC-18212-1
This is an open-source scalar package and associated software tools developed in the Scala programming 
language and includes plotting tools based on the free GRACE plotting package. The scalar package 
represents physical scalars and can help to prevent errors involving physical units in engineering and 
scientific computation. The design also allows users to easily define a specialized or reduced set of 
physical units for any particular application or domain. The scalar package can be used in two modes 
interchangeably: one provides unit compatibility checking but is slower, and the other bypasses the 
compatibility checks but is much faster and still prevents the most common type of unit error.
Open Source
PIQUANT: X-ray Fluorescence Quantification Software  N PO-50887-1
Calibration work to enhance the elemental quantification capabilities of the prototype Planetary Instrument 
for X-ray Lithochemistry (PIXL) on Mars 2020 will ultimately benefit scientists analyzing PIXL data derived 
from the eventual flight instrument. Quantification of X-ray data is made possible using PIQUANT, the 
in-house fundamental parameters (FP) approach software constructed for this application.
General Public Release
PIXELATE: an Astrobiology Visualization Tool  N PO-50960-1
This software allows scientists to build custom visualizations to analyze M2020 Rover Planetary Instrument 
for X-ray Lithochemistry (PIXL) instrument data, including geological morphology and elemental 
composition. It has a tool called an X-ray spectrometer that identifies chemical elements at a tiny scale. PIXL 
also has a camera that takes super close-up pictures of rock and soil textures, capturing features as small 
as a grain of salt. This tool combines this data into a visual format.
General Public Release
PixelLearn NPO-42082-1
PixelLearn is a tool for classifying the pixels in scientific image data sets. Based on one or more images on 
the same grid, the tool uses cutting-edge clustering algorithms to automatically find structures in the image, 
or to label individual classes and use supervised classification methods to extend the labels to the rest of 
the image.
U.S. Government Purpose Release
Pixelwise Correlation-Based Landscape Classification (PiCo) L AR-19015-1
PiCo automates and regionalizes the Climate Landscape Response (CLaRe) metrics. CLaRe maps invasive 
buffelgrass in the Southwestern United States. This grass both propagates and benefits from increased 
wildfire events, and it is a threat to the local ecosystems within the Sonoran Desert. Buffelgrass responds 
to precipitation quicker than native vegetation. This behavior is what CLaRe captures. Correlation values 
derived from regression analysis between Normalized Difference Vegetation Index (NDVI) and precipitation 
values are used to separate pixels invaded by buffelgrass from those that are not. PiCo, written in R, 
performs a pixelwise regression analysis.
Open Source
=====PAGE 85=====
Data and Image Processing
76
NASA Technology Transfer Program  Software Catalog 2025-26
Planetary Data System Image Atlas IV N PO-52045-1
This is a metadata-driven search of IMG’s ~2PB of planetary image data and has bulk downloading 
capability following the “shopping cart” paradigm. It uses file explorer for easy navigation of IMG’s archives 
and includes geospatial search capability. Machine learning-driven feature classification and interactive 
label viewer are included.
General Public Release
Planetary Data System Inspect Tool  N PO-51099-1
The Inspect Tool is a component of the Preparation Tools suite of tools providing functionality for preparing 
data for ingestion into PDS. It is intended to provide a capability for opening and inspecting the contents 
(e.g. label, objects, groups) of any PDS compliant archival product, and a method to visualize selected 
archival products.
Open Source
Plotting Program for Kepler Planet Detection Efficiency Products A RC-17980-1
The Kepler Plotting Program was developed as an aid to understanding the publicly available data files that 
have been released by the Kepler project. This tool allows end users to reproduce plots utilized in project 
documentation, facilitates the user’s scientific understanding, and promotes the utilization of the Kepler 
science data products. The SETI Institutes participated in authoring and producing the KeplerPORTs (Kepler 
Planet Occurrence Rate Tools) under Cooperative Agreement number NNX13AD01A.
Open Source
PO.DAAC Open Software Development  NP O-52065-1
The Physical Oceanography Distributed Active Archive Center (PO.DAAC) at JPL was designated the 
Physical Oceanography discipline DAAC in 1992. PO.DAAC is responsible for assembling, distributing, 
and providing data services for a comprehensive archive of NASA flight mission observations to facilitate 
research, application, and policy formulation in support of NASA Earth sciences.
Open Source
PODAAC Level 2 Subsetter  N PO-51992-1
This software is capable of spatial, temporal, and variable subsetting of NetCDF Level 2 data products.  
Provides an adapter for the EOSDIS Harmony API.
Open Source
PointClouds VR G SC-18208-1
This tool visualizes and manipulates point clouds from multiple scientific domains in virtual reality, including 
time-dependent point clouds. Point clouds can be colored by reflectance, natural color, elevation, or even 
mapping hyperspectral data to color channels. It can animate points forwards and backwards in time from 
calculations or by loading separate point cloud datasets as frames. It is able to visualize locations captured 
from Lidar data, such as lava tubes scanned by planetary scientists, to allow revisiting field sites.
Open Source 
PolyFit: A C++ Code for Polynomial Curve Fit with Calculation of Error Bars  M SC-26693-1
This C++ code calculates the coefficients of a polynomial of a degree k that is the best fit for a series of n 
points (xi,yi) using the least-squares method. The code offers two options: (1) to fix, or not, the intercept 
(the first coefficient) to a given value; and, (2) to use weights on points proportional to their errors, or 
inversely proportional to the square of the errors. PolyFit calculates the error and confidence intervals of the 
coefficients, the total and residual sum of squares, the coefficient R2, and the covariance and correlation 
matrices. It also reports the results of an ANOVA test for the fit, and writes the prediction and confidence 
bands into a file. The source code is provided as a single file using basic C++, so that it can be re-used 
easily.
Open Source
=====PAGE 86=====
Data and Image Processing
77
NASA Technology Transfer Program  Software Catalog 2025-26
Planetary Orbital Mosaicking and Mapping (POMM) Software Toolset N PO-52608-1
POMM is a set of software tools (with user interface) supporting the automation of Earth and Planetary 
orbital image mosaicking and mapping, including: 1) the ability of co-register (stack) multiple orbital map 
images over the same location for time series analysis; 2) Mosaic mulitiple adjacent overlapping orbital 
images to create large-area basemap coverages and regional overviews; and 3) Create map-projected 
orbital satellite images from selected sensors and bands provided in PDS (Planetary Data System) format. 
As a subset of the AFIDS software environment (NTR 52175), POMM also provides a large variety of 
general purpose image processing tools for performing change detection, time series, and related satellite 
scene analyses.
General Public Release
Portable Environment for Quick Image Processing (QuIP) A RC-16295-1A
The QuIP interpreter, a software environment for QUick image processing, uses an interactive scripting 
language designed to facilitate use for everyday users. It features context-sensitive automatic response 
completion and integrated documentation, and also includes a number of script packages that implement 
high-, medium-, and low-level functions (e.g., analysis of eye images for human gaze tracking, feature 
tracking, and image filtering). 
Open Source
Pour: A Framework for Periodic, On-Demand,  
and User-Specified Information Reconciliation A RC-15468-1
Pour is a general-purpose information service framework for periodic, on-demand, and user-specified 
information reconciliation. The technology is designed to accommodate a wide variety of information types 
with support for high-volume, low-frequency periodic updates, user-specified updates, and automatic 
updates collected on demand when needed. 
Open Source
Precipitation Interface for the Middle East (PrIME) L AR-18945-1
This tool allows users to visualize data from several sources and extract data at points of interest. There are 
seven types of data loaded into the interface (SRTM, MOD16, GRACE, TRMM, GPM, school location points, 
and a study area polygon). When the user clicks on a point within the study area extent (where there is data 
present), the interface returns three graphs, each of which shows the historical amount of a climatological 
variable (precipitation, groundwater, and evapotranspiration). The interface automatically loads all data and 
centers the map around the study area, though layers can be turned on and off as the user desires.
Open Source
Principle Component Analysis (PCA) for Thermography NDE Data  L AR-20094-1
This software reads thermography data and performs principal component analysis (a well known technique 
used on many data types) on the data over a specified number of image frames.
U.S. Release Only
Probabilistic Assessment of Surface Composition by Remote Imaging Spectroscopy  N PO-51367-1
This algorithm is being used primarily as a research strategy with end-to-end accounting and propagation of 
uncertainty across calibration, reflectance, and mineral detection with closure of error budgets and residuals 
consistent with uncertainty predictions. This is the first time statistical validation of second-order uncertainty 
predictions has been demonstrated in the domain of remote mineralogy mapping. The approach applies to 
surface composition measurement in other planetary and Earth science domains.
Open Source
=====PAGE 87=====
Data and Image Processing
78
NASA Technology Transfer Program  Software Catalog 2025-26
Probabilistic Iterative Inversion of Combined Surface/Atmosphere  
Models for Atmospheric Correction of Imaging Spectrometer Data  N PO-50704-1
This software package permits inversion of imaging spectrometer data using a  Bayesian probabilistic 
formalism and least squares optimization with a “forward model” of photon transport to match an estimate of 
atmosphere and surface properties to the measured spectrum. It is instantiated as a python package and can 
take advantage of externally-available radiative transfer packages such as MODTRAN. It runs on data formats 
such as ASCII text files and binary files similar to those used by NASA instruments such as AVIRIS-NG.
Open Source
ProtoSpace Web CAD Renderer  NP O-52525-1
This program renders complex CAD models in a web browser at interactive framerates. It was originally 
designed and implemented for the ProtoSpace project.
General Public Release
Py-Sonde-Comparison  N PO-52559-1
The program has three core elements. Read product: This method reads satellite data products, which will 
be modified as new groups are included in the analysis. Key elements extracted are lat/lon, ozone profiles, 
and aprioris and averaging kernels. Colocate: This method takes the data from read product and uses the 
WOUDC ozonesonde extraction tool pywoudc to extract ozonesonde data within the same timeframe as the 
satellite data. The lat/lon and timestamps of satellite data are compared with those of the ozonesondes, if 
matches are found within a certain tolerance, these locations are saved, and output as a separate datafile. 
Plot results: This method takes the files saved in colocate and performs statistical analysis and plots the 
results for further analysis and discussion.
General Public Release
PyCMR M FS-33409-1
This Python client library (pyCMR) abstracts the CMR search application program interface which calls to a 
simple set of Python functions that can be incorporated into client applications. The search responses are 
stored in the Python dictionary for easy manipulation on the client side.
Open Source
PySA ARC-18893-1
PySA is a powerful tool for solving optimization problems. It uses different numerical techniques (such as 
parallel-tempering, annealed importance sampling and path-integral monte carlo) and was specifically 
designed to run on HPC clusters. It also offers a user-friendly interface to allowing users with any 
background to use PySA, without any prior knowledge of high-performance computing.
Open Source
PyTDI  NP O-52047-1
PyTDI is a Python package which provides a toolset to perform symbolical and numerical time-delay 
interferometry (TDI) calculations. Its functionalities include definition of arbitrary linear combination of time-
shifted signals (i.e., TDI combinations), symbolical handling of TDI combinations, and numerical evaluation 
of TDI combinations. It also provides commonly used TDI combinations ready to use (first- and second-
generation Michelson, quasi-orthogonal), and can compute clock-noise corrected combinations.
General Public Release
Python-ION interface (pyion) N PO-51196-1
Pyion provides a Python interface to JPL ’s Interplantary Overlay Network (ION) via a Proxy class that allows 
create Endpoints through which users can send or receive bytes, bytearrays, and memory views. They 
operate in a manner similar to how TCP/UDP sockets operate.
Open Source
=====PAGE 88=====
Data and Image Processing
79
NASA Technology Transfer Program  Software Catalog 2025-26
Quick-Plot General-Purpose Plotting Tool D RC-012-022
Quick-Plot is a general-purpose tool used to plot Armstrong time-history data files and data files in the 
MATLAB format. The graphical user interface allows commands to be scripted and read from an input script 
file; input signals can be modified using algebraic expressions.
U.S. and Foreign Release
Radio Astronomy Software Tools N PO-51204-1
Radio Astronomy Software Tools is a collection of software packages that have proven useful in doing radio 
astronomy with NASA’s Deep Space Network.  It includes a monitor and control system that is overlaid on 
the operational monitor and control to provide features necessary or useful for conducting radio astronomy 
research. The collection may provide a quick way to start a small single dish radio astronomy ab initio. It can 
also manage a telescope system in which all subsystems have their own, network-accessible controllers.
Open Source
Rainfall Analysis Integration (RAIn) L AR-19205-1
This software analyzes Tropical Rainfall Measuring Mission (TRMM), Global Precipitation Measurement 
(GPM), and Climate Hazards Group InfraRed Precipitation with Station (CHIRPS) precipitation data. It also 
analyzes Terra Moderate Resolution Imaging Spectrometer (MODIS) Normalized Difference Vegetation Index 
(NDVI), Normalized Difference Drought Index (NDDI), and Land Surface Temperature (LST) data. Areas are 
mapped on the screen and corresponding trend charts are produced. The software also provides a visual 
comparison with social and economic variables including human population density, demographic, and 
conflict data to better understand the dynamics within these stressed areas.
Open Source
Random Forest Classifier for Real-Time Operations  N PO-51337-1
There are several points along the journey from space where data can get lost. This program determines 
whether data was lost and, if so, where it was lost. Machine learning techniques analyze and predict the 
classifications.
Open Source
Random Variable Library A RC-18082-1
This software library provides a framework for uncertainty representation using probability distributions. 
The Random Variable Library presents a solution to overcome the challenges presented by various forms of 
uncertainty. In particular, standard parametric distributions such Gaussian, Lognormal, etc. are supported, 
in addition to non-parametric representations such as unweighted/weighted samples, percentiles, etc. It is 
extendable, allowing for the addition of additional distributions. Beyond representation, the library includes 
basic capabilities for multivariate sampling and fitting using several methods. 
Open Source
Rapid Model Import Tool (RMIT), Version 2.0 K SC-14470
The Rapid Model Import Tool (RMIT) version 2 is an enhancement to the original RMIT software. It is 
software designed to import 3D models from Computer Aided Design (CAD) software tools such as 3DS 
Max, Catia, or Creo, and perform several modifications to the model’s underlying format. Some of the 
modifications include flattening the hierarchical tree structure of the model’s objects, translating the model 
to world coordinates origin, polygon simplification, and object merging, all designed to reduce the size of the 
model’s file structure, while retaining fidelity to the original model. This new version expands file formats to 
most CAD file types. A support form has also been added for user feedback as well as MRET (Mixed Reality 
Exploration Toolkit) support. There are also expanded model manipulation tools such as linking of materials 
to reduce material definition bloat and finer control over model decimation.
General Public Release
=====PAGE 89=====
Data and Image Processing
80
NASA Technology Transfer Program  Software Catalog 2025-26
Rasters NPO-53016-1
This Python software package provides a comprehensive solution for handling gridded and swath raster 
data. It offers an object-oriented interface for ease of use, treating rasters, raster geometries, and vector 
geometries as objects. This allows for seamless map visualization in Jupyter notebooks and efficient 
resampling between swath and grid geometries.
General Public Release
Raytracing Atmospheric Delay Estimation for RADAR (RAiDER) N PO-51433-1
RAiDER is a Python package that contains tools to calculate tropospheric radar slant delays for both 
airborne and space borne sensors. It estimates delays by calculating the index of refractivity at the native 
weather model grid nodes and then integrating along the ray path of the signal, from the ground pixel to the 
sensor location (up to a reference height).
Open Source
Real Time Spectroscopic Survey and Analysis  N PO-50185-1
The real-time system operates onboard the AVIRIS-NG instrument computer. It first executes the standard 
AVIRIS-NG ground data pipeline to create calibrated radiance measurements. It then matches these spectra 
to the known absorption signature of the target. For example, when mapping fugitive leaks from natural gas 
and oil infrastructure, the procedure allows operators to detect CH4 emissions in real time. These detections 
are geolocated so that operators know the precise latitude/longitude coordinates. A watchdog process 
waits for a new image to appear on disk. The real-time analysis results are stored making them immediately 
available on the operator display. 
Open Source
Real-Time Wildfire Localization on the NASA Autonomous Modular Sensor (AMS) L AR-20504-1
This work presents the use of a state-of-the-art segmentation model that performs real-time wildfire 
localization that can be integrated into the framework of current national wildfire observation missions. This 
software is companion to the Real-Time Wildfire Localization on the NASA Autonomous Modular Sensor 
using Deep Learning.
Open Source
Regional Incendiary Fuel Risk Assessment Framework (RIFRAF) L AR-19156-1
Climate data from the Google Earth Engine library was leveraged in a script to calculate the fire potential 
in the Missouri River Basin. Variables instrumental to fire potential were drought conditions, temperature, 
relative humidity, precipitation, wind speed, and fuel moisture.
Open Source
Requirements Tracing on Target (RETRO) G SC-14976-1
RETRO offers methods and techniques for information retrieval (IR), including vector retrieval and probabilistic 
retrieval. 
Open Source
RiverObs  NP O-50138-1
RiverObs is a set of Python modules designed to ingest raster or point data, project them to a river 
centerline, modify the centerline, if desired, and calculate quantities, such as width, slope, or stage that 
apply to a river reach.
Open Source
=====PAGE 90=====
Data and Image Processing
81
NASA Technology Transfer Program  Software Catalog 2025-26
Rock Shadow Counter (ROSCO) N PO-52954-1
Rock Shadow Counter (ROSCO) is a suite of software tools developed at JPL for the purpose of 
characterizing the rockiness of the planetary surfaces in high resolution aerial/orbital images such as HiRISE 
images from MRO. The software has tools and workflow for sharpening input images, detecting rocks in the 
sharpened images, visualizing outputs, registering output data to a coordinate system, and creating raster 
maps derived from the detected rocks.
General Public Release
Rocket Plume Spectroscopy Simulation for Hydrocarbon-Fueled Rocket Engines S SC-00281
Enhancements and modifications to a code developed for plume spectral data analysis in 1994 have made 
the original computer program applicable to the space shuttle main engine and the Diagnostic Test-bed 
Facility Thruster (DTFT). The new code can now handle the non-uniform wavelength intervals at which  
spectral computations are made.
U.S. Government Purpose Release
Roman Coronagraph EXCAM Image Processing Software N PO-52932-1
This software cleans and calibrates images produced by the Nancy Grace Roman Space Telescope 
Coronagraph Instrument’s Exoplanetary Systems Camera (EXCAM). Roman is an upcoming NASA 
astrophysics observatory, and EXCAM is the “science” camera for the Coronagraph Instrument onboard 
Roman. EXCAM uses a visible-light CCD sensor.
General Public Release
Roman Coronagraph Image Simulator Wrapper N PO-53213-1
This software package includes routines and example scripts for simulating observations with the Roman 
Coronagraph using two open-source packages. The goal of this software package is to provide a more 
user-friendly, modular, accessible way of using these open-source tools.
General Public Release
SAR Exploration Notebooks  N PO-52050-1
The notebooks enable quick visualization and interpretation of false-color SAR RGB images, and 
InSAR correlation images. Notebooks are run in Google Colab, and the first cells  will set up the python 
environment. Users are asked to upload image samples into their Google Drive for easy access from Google 
Colab.
Open Source
Scalable Gaussian Process Regression (Block GP) A RC-16864-1
Block GP is a Gaussian process regression framework for multimodal data that can be an order of 
magnitude more scalable than existing state-of-the-art nonlinear regression algorithms. The framework 
builds local Gaussian processes on semantically meaningful partitions of the data and provides 
higher prediction accuracy than a single global model with very high confidence. The method relies on 
approximating the covariance matrix of the entire input space by smaller covariance matrices that can be 
modeled independently, and can therefore be parallelized for faster execution.
Open Source
SciHound  N PO-51299-1
SciHound is an Android app that allows users to survey areas and help with calibration and validation of 
land cover maps from remote sensing. It streamlines the interfacing between remote sensing scientists and 
researchers from the broader environmental sciences community. 
Open Source
=====PAGE 91=====
Data and Image Processing
82
NASA Technology Transfer Program  Software Catalog 2025-26
SciXR NPO-52576-1
The Science Collaboration and data Interaction eXtended Reality tool (SciXR) is the combination of the 
SciVR (NTR 50913) virtual reality tool and SciAR (NTR 51857) augmented reality tool for immersive science 
data exploration and analysis. SciXR provides a rich, real-time science data visualization engine in an 
interactive extended reality (XR) environment for use by scientists. 
General Public Release
Scaled Drought Condition Index (SDCI) L AR-19472-1
This innovation processes Normalized Difference Vegetation Index, land surface temperature, and 
precipitation data. It then scales each component based on regional maxima and minima. Each scaled value 
is then inserted into the Scaled Drought Condition Index equation in order to produce a monthly drought 
index value for each pixel in the study area.
Open Source
SequenceMiner: Anomaly Detection in Large Sets  
of High-Dimensional Symbol Sequences A RC-16053-1
SequenceMiner was developed to address the problem of detecting and describing anomalies in large 
sets of high-dimensional symbol sequences. The technology performs unsupervised clustering (grouping) 
of sequences using the normalized longest common subsequence (LCS) as a similarity measure, followed 
by a detailed analysis of outliers to detect anomalies. SequenceMiner utilizes a new hybrid algorithm for 
computing the LCS that has been shown to outperform existing algorithms by a factor of five.
Open Source
Separable Grid N-Dimensional Interpolator (SGNDI) L EW-19702-1
This is a software library for multidimensional numerical data interpolation, in an arbitrary number of 
dimensions. Analytical gradients are supported.
Open Source
Sigma: WinPlot Statistical Calculator MF S-34537-1
Generates a WinPlot data file using Sun/WinPlot input data sources and text files which specify the data 
sets used for input and parameters to be processed. Output data includes a min, max, average and sigma 
value for each parameter throughout the time slice processed.
General Public Release
Simple Analysis of Vegetative Trends in Earth Engine (SAVeTrEE) L AR-19195-1
SAVeTrEE is a script within Google Earth Engine for classifying areas of vegetation mortality. It prompts the 
user for a year, duration, and spectral index for which a mortality map should be produced, then fits a trend 
line to an imagery time sequence of vegetative spectral index values calculated from Landsat multispectral 
data. The slope of the trend line, as well as the spectral index values, are used in determining the final 
classification of each pixel within the study area. Classification categories are: growing, mortality declining, 
stable vegetation, and stable barren.
Open Source
Simplegrid: Simple Local Grid Creation and Refinement for Ocean Circulation Models  N PO-51303-1
Simplegrid is a Python package for creating, refining, and joining horizontal quadrilateral grids that are used 
in connection with the MIT General Circulation Model (MITgcm). Simplegrid is based on equal great circle 
arc subdivision (hence the name) with geodesic computations provided by pyproj/PROJ.4, and implements 
both Python callable and command-line functionality for embedded and scripted solutions. It also contains 
several useful utilities for grid manipulation, file i/o, and coincident edge detection.
Open Source
=====PAGE 92=====
Data and Image Processing
83
NASA Technology Transfer Program  Software Catalog 2025-26
Simulation Package for Underwater Hydrothermal Vents N PO-51593-1
This software simulates the shape, appearance, and composition of hydrothermal vents, and the structure 
of an instrument package designed to study vents.
Open Source
 
Simulation-Based Uncertainty Quantification for Atmospheric Sounding  N PO-51511-1
Specific algorithm implementation choices can impact the algorithm’s accuracy and precision. This 
probabilistic and computational pipeline can be studied in depth with Monte Carlo simulation experiments 
of the satellite observing system using ensembles of realistic true states. This software facilitates design and 
post-processing of these simulation experiments. 
Open Source
SBG Space-based Imaging Spectroscopy and Thermal Pathfinder (SISTER) N PO-52508-1
The SISTER system is composed of an on-demand algorithm development environment and science data 
processing system. The system includes prototype workflows, algorithms, and datasets that are proxies for 
NASA’s upcoming Surface Biology and Geology (SBG) mission.
General Public Release
Segmentation, Instance Tracking, and Data Fusion  
Using Multi-SEnsor Imagery (SIT-FUSE) NP O-52538-1
An unsupervised machine learning method uses level 1 (L1) radiances from various satellite and airborne 
imagers, as well as the fusion of datasets, where applicable, as input. This method was tested on data 
collected during the Fire Influence on Regional to Global Environments and Air Quality (FIREX-AQ) 
campaign,as well as other data fusion and segmentation datasets. The clustered output of the unsupervised 
models accurately identifies objects wildfires, smoke plumes, and burn scars, and establishes the basis for 
future automated tracking capabilities.
General Public Release
Skyglow Estimation Toolbox (SET) L AR-19184-1
This script models light pollution from differing azimuth and beta angles, creates hemispheric models of light 
pollution at given points on the landscape, and generates products relevant to decision makers in the park 
service or any regional actor interested in examining the effects of light pollution on natural resources.
Open Source
Software Lifecycle Improvement and Modernization (SLIM)  NP O-52266-1
The Software Lifecycle Improvement and Modernization (SLIM) project seeks to provide sample scripts, 
configuration, documentation, and recommendations for best practices in software lifecycle modernization, 
software governance improvements and standards, as well as software information sharing consistency 
and standards. Through both software and documentation, SLIM improves overall software lifecycle 
standards for multi-mission Multi-mission Ground Software Systems (MGSS) Instrument Data Systems (IDS) 
participant teams and software projects.
Open Source
=====PAGE 93=====
Data and Image Processing
84
NASA Technology Transfer Program  Software Catalog 2025-26
Software to Compute Loudness Levels of Sonic Boom Noise  
with an Optional Correction for Ambient Noise Contamination L AR-20093-1
Several software algorithms are implemented as Matlab code to compute the loudness level of an array of 
sonic boom waveforms that are input to the code (named Narrow-band Octave-band Metrics, or NOM). 
Multiple quantities are computed and returned by this software for each of the input waveforms. An ambient 
noise correction can be applied. The loudness level metrics and spectra are returned by the software with 
option to exclude from the output metrics and spectra that are of no interest to the user. An optional, user 
defined offset can be applied to the one-third-octave band spectra prior to computing the loudness levels of 
the input waveforms to mimic the effects of frequency dependent signal attenuation.
General Public Release
Sorting and PDS4 Labeling of DSN TRK-2-34 Data N PO-53147-1
All deep space missions performing radio science must archive raw data within the Planetary Data System 
(PDS). The Tracking and Navigation File (TRK-2-34) is the current standard format for radiometric data 
acquired at the Deep Space Network (DSN). This software allows users to quickly create the necessary label 
compliant with the current PDS4 standards for archiving within the PDS.
General Public Release
Space Technology Application Renderer (STAR) M SC-27550-1
This is an early access preview release of the STAR Graphics and Display engine. The engine is being 
developed for the purposes of creating low power-draw, high-performance graphics applications for a 
variety of space missions and hardware form factors. The software implements unique features such as 
hot reloading to assist with agile development workflows and internal memory management with stretchy 
buffers to take the burden of safe memory management away from the end developer. The software is 
currently in active development and intended for evaluation purposes only at this time.
U.S. Release Only
Spatial Resolution Verification Tool (SRVT) S SC-00339
An automated Spatial Resolution Verification Tool (SRVT) was developed to rapidly determine the spatial 
resolution characteristics of remotely sensed aerial and satellite imagery. Most current methods for assessing 
spatial resolution characteristics of imagery rely on pre-deployed engineered targets and are performed only 
at selected times within pre-selected scenes. The SRVT addresses these insufficiencies by finding uniform, 
high-contrast edges from urban scenes and then uses these edges to determine standard estimators of 
spatial resolution, such as the modulation transfer function (MTF) and the relative edge response (RER).
U.S. Government Purpose Release
Spectral Analysis Tool (SAT), Version 6.2 N PO-43129-1
The SAT computer program calculates signal spectra, bandwidths, and interference effects for several 
families of modulation schemes found commonly in radio, satellites, and space communications. It is 
primarily used for spectrum management purposes to examine the effects of radio frequency interference 
on a satellite communication system.
U.S. Government Purpose Release
SpiceyJS: Time Conversion Library Based on NAIF’s CSPICE  N PO-50793-1
Spicey is a time-conversion library based on NAIF’s CSPICE. This project only includes wrappers for the 
functions relevant to time conversion and some light time calculations. The default kernels are enough to 
refer to most NAIF ID’s, a planetary constants kernel, and a leap seconds kernel.
Open Source
=====PAGE 94=====
Data and Image Processing
85
NASA Technology Transfer Program  Software Catalog 2025-26
SPOC-Lite: On-Board, Lightweight Terrain Classifier for Planetary Rovers  NP O-50647-1
The SPOC-Lite software is intended for on-board rover software to enhance safety of autonomous 
driving. By remotely detecting sandy surface, the rover can safely avoid slips/wheel embedding caused by 
sandy terrains.
Open Source
Structural Analysis Routines (STARS) D RC-011-003
Structural Analysis Routines (STARS) is an efficient, cost-effective, and unique computer program that 
analyzes a variety of practical engineering problems. The software is a fully integrated, multidisciplinary, 
finite-element-based, graphic-oriented analysis tool that combines individual modules to solve complex 
engineering problems. STARS can be used for a range of applications, including structural analysis, heat 
transfer, linear aerodynamics, and computational fluid dynamics (CFD), as well as coupled linear and 
CFD-based (aeroelastic, aeroacoustic, and aerothermoelastic) analysis. Because of the tool’s highly  
integrated nature, it has broad application across many engineering disciplines.
U.S. and Foreign Release
Stellar: A Web-Based Design System for Information  
Dense Applications in Spacecraft Operations  NP O-52220-1
Modern web applications use a variety of popular libraries for user-interface design. The most common 
today include Material by Google, and Bootstrap by Twitter. These libraries expose common elements of 
a standardized design that can be used across applications (e.g. button, input field, etc.). When building 
applications for spacecraft operations the main problem that arises with these libraries is they are optimized 
for mobile, and their elements take up more screen space than necessary. The Stellar software aims to solve 
this problem by providing design and implementation of elements that are more efficient with screen space 
so more information can be displayed in smaller screen areas. This increases overall usability, as more data 
is available without having to scroll or increase the screen size.
Open Source
Streaming 3D Tile Support for Unity3D Game Engine  N PO-50595-1
3D Tiles is an emerging standard for describing and storing large 3D models as a series of tiles at various 
levels of detail. These tiles are broken up according to a space partitioning graph. This enables rendering 
clients to download only the tiles needed to saturate the resolution of a client devices display. This gives 
the illusion of downloading and rendering the entire 3D model but only requires a small portion of it be 
downloaded and displayed by the client device at any given time.
Open Source
Student Wildfire Classification Jupyter Notebooks NP O-53070-1
These are 4 Jupyter notebooks that prepare airborne radar data for wildfire classification products. 
The notebooks use a super pixel segmentation method to generate fire perimeters and a simple 
k-means clustering method to classify burn severity for SAR data. These notebooks automate the data 
pre-processing for polarimetric radar remote sensing data, and generate preliminary fire perimeter and burn 
severity maps, which are usually manually generated and from sources other than radar.
General Public Release
Sun Format Database (SunAcc) File Read/Write Library M FS-32397-1
The Sun Format Database (SunAcc) was developed to fulfill a need for local native storage of space 
shuttle main engine (SSME) test data. While the file format itself is native to the Sun UNIX platform, the 
read/write library was developed to be a cross-platform tool and is compatible with a variety of UNIX and 
Windows platforms.
U.S. Release Only
=====PAGE 95=====
Data and Image Processing
86
NASA Technology Transfer Program  Software Catalog 2025-26
Surface Water Indication Model (SWIM) L AR-19013-1
SWIM is a user-friendly tool that allows users to identify surface water from the most current imagery 
available or monitor temporal changes of surface water in their management areas. The code provides 
calculations for water indices and thresholding, as well as algorithms for slope and aspect creation.
Open Source
Surfer: An Extensible Pull-Based Framework for Resource Selection and Ranking A RC-15295-1
Surfer examines the pool of potential grid resources and extracts the highest-ranking resources that meet 
user-specified constraints and preferences. The technology has been implemented as a grid service that 
is compliant with an Open Grid Services Infrastructure (OGSI), and it can also be embedded directly into 
Java applications through its application programming interface or into non-java applications through its 
XML-based command-line interface.
Open Source
Swim: A Software Information Metacatalog for the Grid A RC-15469-1
Swim is a software information service for the grid built on top of the NASA-developed Pour framework. 
Software information is periodically gathered from native package managers on FreeBSD, Solaris, and IRIX, 
as well as the RPM, Perl, and Python package managers on multiple platforms. 
Open Source
SWPC CAT Web Tool G SC-18546-1
The SWPC CME Analysis Tool Web (SWPC-CAT-Web) tool is an online version of the original SWPC 
CME Analysis (SWPC-CAT) Tool. The original SWPC CAT tool is developed by the NOAA Space Weather 
Prediction Center (SWPC). It is the primary tool being used by NOAA SWPC in measuring key parameters of 
a Coronal Mass Ejection (CME) as it emerges from the solar corona. 
Open Source
Synthterrain ARC-18971-1
The synthterrain package is software to support the creation of synthetic terrain (at this time craters and 
rock placement) on worlds in the solar system. This software will implement scientific models to calculate 
realistic crater populations in size, depth, and degradation state, as well as rock size frequency distributions. 
This software will enable the the creation of realistic (but synthetic) terrain models for different worlds in the 
solar system.
Open Source
TASC CMOD and Force Test Data Pre-Processor  M FS-34375-1
This software imports load frame test records for crack mouth opening displacement mechanical tests and 
offers the user the ability to perform data processing operations and convert the data into a format readable 
by the Tool for Analysis of Surface Cracks (TASC: NASA Technology MFS-33082-1). The core operations 
performed by this data pre-processing tool are related to data clean-up to correct for extensometer slips 
and alignment of the data with the origin to ensure proper test evaluation within TASC.
U.S. Release Only
TIE 0.4: The Imagery Exchange for the NASA Global Imagery Browse Services  
(GIBS) Project N PO-49883-1
This software is an extension of the HORIZON 5 framework. It delivers horizontal scaling solutions for image 
capturing to automate the generation of the Meta Raster Format (MRF) imagery products.
Open Source
=====PAGE 96=====
Data and Image Processing
87
NASA Technology Transfer Program  Software Catalog 2025-26
Tiled Web Map Service (WMS) Server N PO-44685-1
This technology processes WMS requests that comply with a given request grid from an existing tile 
dataset. It also generates the KML configuration files required to access WMS tiles.
U.S. Government Purpose Release
TilePredictor: Image and Pixelwise Classification  
with Tile-based Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs)  N PO-50821-1
TilePredictor is a Python library designed to rapidly construct and evaluate CNN-based image classifiers 
for image and pixelwise classification problems. The program generates pixelwise predictions using image-
based CNN classifiers which generate a single prediction per image for large images such as those typically 
encountered in remote sensing and astronomy. TilePredictor generates pixelwise predictions by efficiently 
spatially aggregating predictions generated by convolving an image-based CNN over tiles extracted from a 
target image.
Open Source
To the Moon and Beyond M SC-26821-1
An educational game teaching how International Space Station research is helping us on Earth and getting 
us to the Moon and beyond. Users determine what research to fund on the ISS and what projects to fund 
back on Earth. Results from the funded projects determine the budget for the next year. Everything affects 
the outcome of the eight part program. But beware, events can happen that can influence that outcome. Will 
it be possible to complete all of the eight mission objectives in four short years?
General Public Release
Tolerance Domain Specific Language L AR-17546-1
This sensitivity task program employs the Monte Carlo method. Thousands of simulations are run with 
randomly varied input parameters, and then statistical correlations are computed to determine the sensitivity 
of output parameters to each input parameter.
Open Source
Tool for Interactive Plotting, Sonification, and 3D Orbit Display (TIPSOD) G SC-14732-1
TIPSOD is a software application designed for interactive, animated, 4D (space and time) visualization 
of satellite orbits. The technology is implemented in Java 3D and is an extension to the existing Satellite 
Situation Center Web (SSCWeb) 2D static orbit graphics. 
Open Source
Topographical Landmarks for Ground-Level Terrain Relative Navigation on Mars  N PO-52169-1
This program is an automated approach to localization in which the rover makes bearing-only 
measurements to geographic features in its surroundings (hills, boulders, peaked ridge-lines, etc.). When 
the location of these landmarks is cross-referenced with a map of Mars, the resulting solution is globally 
registered and will help correct any drift during visual-odometry-aided drives.
Open Source
Trace Gas Profile Generation Software (GINPUT)  NP O-52465-1
This program generates vertical profiles of greenhouse gases and other trace gases. It primarily generates 
these profiles using only long term trends from NOAA observatories and correlations with  meteorological 
variables. This allows the profiles to be independent of models, which in turn means satellite retrievals that 
use this software’s profiles as prior information are a better independent comparison for the models.
General Public Release
=====PAGE 97=====
Data and Image Processing
88
NASA Technology Transfer Program  Software Catalog 2025-26
Tree3D Dynamics Visualization Tool  M FS-34076-1
Tree3D is a generic graphics package for MSFC’s TREETOPS simulation engine that can be adapted to any 
6-degree-of-freedom simulations. Tree3D internally supports a number of celestial bodies/basic geometries 
in addition to anything that the user can provide. Bring your simulations to life with Tree3D.
U.S. Government Purpose Release
TrickFMI: A Functional Mockup Interface (FMI)  
Standard Implementation for Trick Base Models and Simulations M SC-26230-1
This software supports FMI-based model exchange with Trick-based simulations.
Open Source
Unity: Multi-tenant, Managed Product Development,  
Generation, and Analysis Platform  NP O-52159-1
The software brings together two key mission activities: Algorithm Development, Data Processing and 
Storage, and Data use and analysis. The software creates a platform for algorithm developers to login and 
develop production quality algorithms through the use of standard tools, interfaces, and packaging that is 
automated on behalf of the user. The packages seamlessly fit into production quality processing systems 
(think: run at scale on thousands of nodes) with little effort from the algorithm developers. The same 
algorithm developed is used in the production of standard data products by a mission, fit for science usage 
and archival. Lastly, the same platform used to create the algorithms and data products is used to analyze 
and validate the products as well. The cohesive ecosystem for development, generation, and validation is 
designed to speed up the development effort and enable evolution of back end components over time.
Open Source
Vectorization of Global Flood Monitoring System Using Topojson G SC-17169-1
This program allows for the generation of vectors by reading global flood monitoring data, processing the 
data, and generating aTopoJSON-encoded file for visualization on the Web.
Open Source
Vectorized Simulated Measurements of the Atmosphere Using  
Radiative Transfer Based on the Matrix Operator Method (vSmartMOM) N PO-52333-1
This is a full end-to-end modular software suite for radiative transfer and related atmospheric analysis.  It 
develops a fast and accurate mechanism to simulate measurements (satellite, airborne, ground-based) of 
the Earth’s atmosphere. This represents the state of the art in the ability to estimate green house gas (mainly 
CO2) concentrations and their sinks by remotely sensing the health of forest canopies in terms of their 
vertical moisture distribution.
Open Source
VegMapper  NP O-51295-1
VegMapper is an open-source package build in the R language, that employ Bayesian algorithms to 
generate the presence probability for a user-defined class. It automates and streamlines all GIS operations 
to integrate remote sensing imagery with in-situ data. The package is flexible and can accept a variable 
number of predictor variables and in-situ points.
Open Source
Video Image Communication and Retrieval (VICAR) N PO-49845-1
VICAR is a general-purpose image processing software system that has been developed since 1966 to 
digitally process multi-dimensional imaging data. It is used for a variety of other applications including 
biomedical image processing, cartography, Earth resources, astronomy, and geological exploration.
Open Source
=====PAGE 98=====
Data and Image Processing
89
NASA Technology Transfer Program  Software Catalog 2025-26
Video Acuity Measurement System A RC-16661-1
The metric of video acuity is used to quantify performance of video systems, using the smallest letters that 
can be recognized when viewed. The video system comprises a camera and associated optics and sensor, 
processing elements including digital compression, transmission over an electronic network, and viewing of 
the display by a human viewer on an electronic display. The quality of the system will impact the ability of the 
human viewer to perform public safety tasks, such as reading of automobile license plates, recognition of 
faces, and recognition of handheld weapons. This automated system for measuring video acuity is based on 
a model of human letter recognition. 
U.S. Government Purpose Release
Video Image Stabilization and Registration (VISAR) M FS-31243-1
This software program will stabilize video images distorted as a result of video camera motion. There are 
multiple applications for this technology including stabilization of images from mobile platforms, crime 
scenes, robotic systems, spacecraft, and home video.
General Public Release
Viewpoints: Software for Visualization of Multivariate Data A RC-16019-1
This software application allows the interactive visualization of multivariate data using a variety of standard 
techniques. Viewpoints can be used with extremely large data sets.
Open Source
Viewshed Tool (CAMP/MMGIS Plugin)  N PO-51796-1
This software performs real-time viewshed analysis from a tiled digital elevation model in a web-based 
mapping system. 
Open Source
Vipersci ARC-18843-1
This VIPER Science package is software to support the activities of the Volatiles Investigating Polar 
Exploration Rover (VIPER) Science Team. This software will implement scientific models to convert 
instrument raw data to useful derived data (but not including any proprietary instrument details). This 
includes functionality for running the models “in reverse” in order to simulate instrument data for tests and 
mission simulations. This software will enable and support the creation of various geospatial data sets 
(maps) to help visualize and understand data from the spacecraft. It will also support the creation of PDS4 
archive labels and structures for eventual data delivery to the Planetary Data System (PDS).
Open Source
VIPRE: A Tool For Visualization of the Impact of Probe Entry Conditions N PO-52498-1
This tool builds a trade space of planetary arrival trajectories and provides a user interface to visualize and 
filter the data. Traditional approaches to planetary arrival trajectory design are typically limited to single 
design points by a mission designer with initially little input from technologists and scientists. The goal is to 
quickly and comprehensively build a total trade space of arrival trajectories. The visualization approach is 
tailored for use by scientists, technologists, and engineers to facilitate concurrent design
General Public Release
VISTA: Visualization for Telemetry Analysis  N PO-51981-1
VISTA is a modern web-based application for telemetry visualization and inspection. VISTA supports real-
time and historical telemetry access for both on-site and remote users via a simple web GUI.  It allows 
exploration and comparison of telemetry data from multiple sources and allows teams to create, persist, and 
share informational displays for use among geographically distributed teams.
General Public Release
=====PAGE 99=====
Data and Image Processing
90
NASA Technology Transfer Program  Software Catalog 2025-26
Visual Environment for Remote Virtual Exploration (VERVE), Version 2 A RC-16457-1A
VERVE is a 3D visualization system that provides situational awareness, science analysis tools, and data 
understanding capabilities for robotics researchers and exploration science operations. The technology  
is highly modular and extensible and includes a 3D scene-graph database, an interactive 3D viewer, and 
associated graphical user interfaces to OSGI plugin-based applications.
Open Source
Visual System for Browsing, Analysis, and Retrieval of Data (ViSBARD) G SC-15744-1
ViSBARD provides a way of visualizing multiple vector and scalar quantities as measured by many 
spacecraft at once. The data are displayed three-dimensionally; it may be displayed either as connected 
lines or as points; and it allows the rapid determination of vector configurations and correlations between 
many measurements at multiple points. 
Open Source
Visualization of CALIPSO (VOCAL) L AR-18710-1
VOCAL offers an easy-to-use GUI interface that allows users to open CALIPSO satellite data and visualize 
that data on a plot. Users can then select areas of the plot by drawing “shapes” around those areas and 
label shapes with attributes and notes. Shapes can be exported to a backend database which can serve as 
a centralized point for researchers to share data and help track and identify aerosols in the atmosphere.
Open Source
Water Resources Integration Toolbox (WRIT) L AR-19191-1
This collection of tools manages data, including programs to geolocate and rescale ACOLITE output to 
make it useful in ArcMap, batch convert a netCDF file (output from ACOLITE) into a raster layer, convert data 
projections, and truncate all rasters in folder by the desired character string and create txt files of folder 
paths for all Landsat or ACOLTIE Images in a folder.
Open Source
Waveport Scattering Library  NP O-51963-1
The Waveport Scattering Library is a collection of equations, derivations, and Matlab codes on selected 
topics in electromagnetic scattering.
Open Source
Web WorldWind 3D Virtual Globe, Version 0.10 A RC-15166-1D
Virtual globe technology is an application programming interface-centeric software development kit. It is 
elemental technology that allows others to see their spatial data in the native context of Earth or any other 
planet for which there is data. Any application, proprietary or other, can use NASA World Wind to see their 
data in a 3D context.
Open Source
Web-Based Search Service to Support Imaging Spectrometer Instrument Operations  N PO-49004-1
Just as Web search involves more than matching phrases, spectral search is more challenging than simply 
matching the shape of the spectrum. The background substrate and illumination changes can cause the 
same signature to appear very different across scenes. This search service uses an adaptive matched-filter 
approach that compensates for the context and background characteristics of each scene. 
U.S. Government Purpose Release
=====PAGE 100=====
Data and Image Processing
91
NASA Technology Transfer Program  Software Catalog 2025-26
Webification of Earth Science Guidance Documentation  N PO-51335-1
This technology provides a full stack web application to convert legacy PODAAC user guide documentation 
from DOCX to HTML and creates standardized structure and intelligently manipulate the content of the 
documents. The web app is to be used as an internal tool for PODAAC Data Engineers. The web application 
builds upon an open-source Python 3 library called Mammoth, which converts DOCX to simple and clean 
HTML. After conversion to HTML, the application parses the HTML using Beautiful Soup 4, adds Bootstrap 
CSS styling, wraps all img and table tags in responsive CSS classes, converts any unsupported images to 
PNGs, converts all FTP links to HTTPS PODAAC Drive links and dynamically creates a hyperlinked table of 
contents. The HTML output is responsive, mobile friendly and fully self contained in one file. The application 
is containerized using Docker and orchestrated via Docker Compose. The application uses React for the 
frontend, Flask for the backend and Nginx as a reverse proxy server.
Open Source
WinPlot Graphical Display System MF S-31664-1
WinPlot is a powerful desktop graphical analysis tool that allows the user to generate displays of 
unrestricted amounts of data. It was developed to fulfill the need for fast and easily managed graphical 
displays of NASA test articles and facilities. WinPlot features include seamless displays of real-time and 
post-test data with time and event-time synchronization of data from multiple sources.
General Public Release
Worldview Satellite Imagery Browsing and Downloading Tool G SC-17111-1
Worldview is a software tool designed for interactively browsing and downloading imagery from NASA’s 
Earth-observing satellites. Building upon a set of open-source mapping and user interface libraries, it 
provides an environment to visually discover interesting phenomena as observed by NASA satellites and 
then download the data for further analysis. The software was originally designed to address the needs of 
the near-real-time applications community to provide relevant information for time-critical scenarios such as 
wildfire and flood management. As such, satellite imagery is available to be viewed in Worldview within four 
hours of observation.
Open Source
XML to HDF-EOS Convertor G SC-15017-1
This software program takes an XML representation of the contents of a Hierarchical Data Format-Earth 
Observing System (HDF-EOS) file and recreates the file from that description. 
Open Source
XML to ODL Convertor G SC-15006-1
This program translates an XML representation of Hierarchical Data Format-Earth Observing System 
(HDF-EOS) ODL metadata back to the ODL format. 
Open Source
Ziggy: A Pipeline Management System for Data Analysis Pipelines  A RC-16332-1B
Ziggy is a software tool that manages complex data analysis pipelines for science missions. It provides 
marshaling and persisting services for each algorithm step, sequencing for algorithm steps, monitoring, 
logging, resource management, and exception handling for all stages of data processing. Ziggy provides the 
ability to select either local processing or processing on the NASA Advanced Supercomputer (NAS); pipelines 
can contain a mix of algorithms that run locally and others that run on NAS. Data accountability is provided 
at all stages of processing: for any given data product produced at any stage, a permanent record is saved 
regarding which software version was used, what parameters and inputs were provided to the algorithm, and 
much more. Ziggy can run on computers running macOS or Linux. It supports algorithms written in Python, 
C++, MATLAB, or Java, and additional language support can be added with just a few lines of code.
Open Source
=====PAGE 101=====
9292
Data Servers  
Processing and Handling
Algorithms, Data Management, Routers,  
Servers, Storage
9292
NASA astronaut and Expedition 72 flight engineer Don Pettit watches as an Astrobee robotic free-flyer outfitted 
with a tentacle-like gripper grapples a “capture cube” on the International Space Station. In the Zero Robotics 
programming competition, students compete to develop algorithms that control the little robots to complete tasks 
on the station while conserving resources. Credit: NASA
=====PAGE 102=====
93
Data Servers Processing and Handling
NASA Technology Transfer Program  Software Catalog 2025-26
Featured Software
Engineering DOUG Graphics for Exploration (EDGE) MS C-24663-1
EDGE is a real-time 3D graphics rendering package based on the Dynamic Onboard Ubiquitous Graphics 
(DOUG) engine. It combines key elements from software tools developed for the Space Shuttle Program 
and International Space Station (ISS) and adapts them for integration with other engineering simulations and 
facilities. The tool allows drop-in integration with the NASA Trick Simulation Environment and provides a 
fusion of 3D graphics and simulation outputs.
General Public Release
IND 2.1: Creation and Manipulation of Decision Trees from Data AR C-14529-1
Decision trees are commonly used in artificial intelligence and statistical pattern recognition. A tree is 
“grown” from data using a recursive-partitioning algorithm. IND re-implements parts of existing standard 
prediction algorithms, offers experimental control suites, and also introduces new, more sophisticated 
methods for growing decision trees.
Open Source
Application Research Toolbox (ART) SS C-00181
Developed in MATLAB, the Application Research Toolbox (ART) is a collection of computer programs that 
implement algorithms and parametric mathematical models for simulating remote sensing systems. The 
programs are especially useful for performing design-tradeoff studies and statistical analyses to support the 
rational development of design requirements for multispectral imaging systems. 
General Public Release
93
=====PAGE 103=====
94
Data Servers Processing and Handling
NASA Technology Transfer Program  Software Catalog 2025-26
Analog Input Data Acquisition Software K SC-13203
With the easy-to-use Analog Input Data Acquisition Software, a user can set up a system for monitoring 
up to five analog input channels. The software requires LabVIEW runtime engine 8.0 (a free download from 
ni.com) to run the executable.
General Public Release
Application Research Toolbox (ART) S SC-00181
Developed in MATLAB, the Application Research Toolbox (ART) is a collection of computer programs that 
implement algorithms and parametric mathematical models for simulating remote sensing systems. The 
programs are especially useful for performing design-tradeoff studies and statistical analyses to support the 
rational development of design requirements for multispectral imaging systems. 
General Public Release
Balancing Load Across Systems (Ballast) A RC-16443-1
Ballast is a tool for balancing user load across Secure Shell Handler (SSH) servers. The system includes a 
load-balancing client, a lightweight data server, scripts for collecting system load, and scripts for analyzing 
user behavior. Because Ballast is invoked as part of the SSH login process, it has access to user names. 
This capability, which is not available in traditional approaches, enables Ballast to perform user-specific load 
balancing. In addition, Ballast is easy to install, induces near-zero overhead, and has fault-tolerant features  
in its architectures that will eliminate single points of failure.
Open Source
Bash-Accessible SSH File System (BASSHFS) A RC-18333-1
A tool that allows remote directories to be manipulated as if they were mounted locally when using the bash 
shell. It is similar to the existing SSHFS utility except it is does not require FUSE kernel support.
Open Source
Bundle Restaging Daemon (BRD), a Delay Tolerant Network Marshall  
Enterprise (DTNME) Feature for Increased Protection against Bundle Overload  MF S-34247-1
Delay Tolerant Network Marshall Enterprise (DTNME) is a NASA supported software for payload operations 
to support reliable space communications. It is fully CCSDS compliant.  This software is continuously 
updated with new technologies to further support and enhance its operational usage. The Bundle Restaging 
Daemon (BRD) is a new DTNME technology feature that allows operations to have better control over 
different data streams within a DTN system. Additionally, BRD provides safeguards to lessen the potential 
impact of any particular data stream against another.
Open Source
CAPTools-Based Automatic Parallelizer Using OpenMP (CAPO) A RC-14487-1
CAPO analyzes a Fortran program and inserts OpenMP directives into the code to improve its performance 
on a parallel machine. The tool relies on accurate inter-procedural data-dependence information currently 
provided by CAPTools, which was developed at the University of Greenwich.
General Public Release
A Software Framework for Control and Observation  
in Distributed Environments (CODE) A RC-14672-1
A framework for the control and observation of resources, services, and applications. The technology 
supports the secure and scalable transmission of observed information to other programs, and it enables 
the secure execution of actions on remote computer systems. 
Open Source
=====PAGE 104=====
95
Data Servers Processing and Handling
NASA Technology Transfer Program  Software Catalog 2025-26
Coordinated Data Analysis Workshop Web (CDAWeb) G SC-14292-1
The CDAWeb software and the CDAWeb service built on this software have been developed and continue 
to be enhanced and maintained by the Space Physics Data Facility. The technology has supported NASA/
Office of Space Science programs dealing with the connections between the Sun and the Earth. CDAWeb 
software is essentially a set of Interactive Data Language (IDL) scripts that act as the engine of the system. 
Open Source
Data Analysis using Imagery Layers (DAG) N PO-52612-1
The DAG software implements a generalized, cloud-enabled web service for the extraction of converted 
geophysical values from satellite imagery layers being served out via Tiled-WMS imagery servers and 
the computation of geo spatial analytics on the data returned. Analyses supported focus on spatial and 
temporal summary statistics for user selected bounding box regions, time ranges and variables of interest. 
The DAG service can be invoked both directly programmatically via calls to the API and via the Flask Open-
API interface implemented by DAG. Outputs can be consumed by various client applications, including 
visualization and other tools.
General Public Release
DBI: Async, An Asynchronous Wrapper for the Perl 6 DBIish  
Database Interaction Subsystem G SC-17824-1
Here is a simple asynchronous API wrapping of the existing Perl 6 DBIish Database interaction module. 
It manages a pool of database handles allocated as needed to perform database queries in a thread-
safe manner. The tool can utilize promises to queue queries that will be performed asynchronously when 
a database handle becomes available, and it handles retries gracefully on database connection failures 
allowing the primary application to continue even when the database goes down and is restarted.
Open Source
Deep Space Network (DSN) Config Converter N PO-45423-1
This tool is used in operations by the MRO and Phoenix missions. It provides both time savings and risk 
reduction in the periodic updating of the dsn_config modeling adaptation. 
U.S. Government Purpose Release
Discovery through Eigenbasis Modeling of Uninteresting Data (DEMUD) N PO-48877-1
This machine learning solution called DEMUD (Discovery through Eigenbasis Modeling of Uninteresting 
Data) works by building a model U of the uninteresting class and then identifying items that are maximally 
anomalous (and therefore likely to be interesting) with respect to that model.
Open Source
DTKA: A Prototype Implementation of Delay-Tolerant Security Key Distribution N PO-49413-1
Unlike all Internet mechanisms for security distribution (e.g., certificate authorities), DTKA operates over 
the extremely long signal propagation times and interrupted links that characterize communication with 
interplanetary spacecraft. It has no single point of failure and cannot be “spoofed” by an attacker’s 
subversion of any single key authority machine (or even two key authority machines, in most configurations). 
Open Source
DTNTAP N PO-48906-1
DTNTAP is a user space Ethernet driver with the potential to expedite DTN deployment by providing a 
transition mechanism for legacy IP applications to run alongside delay/disruption-tolerant applications in 
large-scale communication networks. By presenting an Ethernet-like interface, DTNTAP gives application 
developers access to many of the benefits of DTN without requiring to the user to become immediately 
proficient at a new programming API.
Open Source
=====PAGE 105=====
96
Data Servers Processing and Handling
NASA Technology Transfer Program  Software Catalog 2025-26
Dyper: Dynamic Perimeter Enforcement A RC-16444-1
Dyper protects a site from unauthorized network flows. The tool offers dynamic perimeter enforcement by 
providing a general-purpose mechanism for maintaining least-privilege network security policies while still 
supporting the full utilization of multiport protocols. Dyper requires no changes to software or practices 
outside of the perimeter and only minimal changes inside.
Open Source
Earth Observing System (EOS) Data Gateway (EDG) G SC-14938-1
The Earth Observing System Data Gateway (EDG) provides the Earth science community with a single 
interface that will search for data granules from distributed data archives. The innovation enables users to 
explore, discover, and order available data from geographically distributed providers. 
Open Source
EDGE: The Extensible Data Gateway Environment N PO-49884-1
EDGE uses Apache Solr for the fast-indexed search backend. To further ensure reliable serving of data, 
EDGE’s Apache Solr uses the master and slave model. 
Open Source
EDRN Knowledge Environment  N PO-48644-1
The Jet Propulsion Laboratory has provided the underlying infrastructure to share data, thereby increasing 
the study power associated with capturing and comparing information. The infrastructure provides software 
services including data processing and management (eCAS), biomarker data management (BMDB), 
specimen data management (ERNE), and a portal to link the system together and provide access. 
Open Source
EEPROM File System  G SC-16852-1
EEFS provides a file system abstraction for EEPROM or PROM memories that is simple, efficient, and reliable. 
Open Source
Engineering DOUG Graphics for Exploration (EDGE) M SC-24663-1
EDGE is a real-time 3D graphics rendering package based on the Dynamic Onboard Ubiquitous Graphics 
(DOUG) graphics engine. It combines key elements from graphics software tools developed for Space 
Shuttle and International Space Station (ISS) programs and adapts them for integration with other 
engineering simulations and facilities. The tool allows drop-in integration with the NASA Trick Simulation 
Environment and provides a fusion of 3D graphics and simulation outputs.
General Public Release
Engineering Units Generator (EUGEN) S SC-00151-1
EUGEN converts digitized sensor output voltage data to engineering units. The tool creates individual 
processed data files (one file per transducer per test run), converting raw voltage to meaningful 
measurements such as pressure or temperature.
General Public Release
Ensemble REST: Framework for RESTful Web Services in OSGI N PO-45848-1
Ensemble REST makes it easy for developers to write and deploy RESTful Web applications, and the HTTP 
protocol enables anyone to access and utilize the exposed services. Libraries are available in almost every 
programming language in order to connect a program in the language to an HTTP service. 
U.S. Government Purpose Release
=====PAGE 106=====
97
Data Servers Processing and Handling
NASA Technology Transfer Program  Software Catalog 2025-26
File Exchange Interface (FEI 5) N PO-40075-1
The File Exchange Interface (FEI) service offers secure file transaction, storage, transportation, and 
management services. The tool is implemented with the latest Java technologies for maximum portability 
and supports a 64-bit file system for very large file transfers over secure socket connections. While 
database-driven for file transactions and user access management, FEI offers an interactive client software 
suite for managing administration and general use.
U.S. Government Purpose Release
Fortran Unit Testing Framework (fUnit), Version 1 L AR-17081-1
The fUnit software provides a framework for unit-testing Fortran 90, 95, and 2003 code.
Open Source
Filtering and Reorganization of Excessive E-Mail Emanation (FreeMe) A RC-18334-1
A tool for filtering and reorganization of emails sent to a common address according to criteria specified by 
each user. FreeMe can be used either by a single user as a mail delivery agent or across users as a mailing 
list manager.
Open Source
HDF-EOS2 and HDF-EOS5 Compatibility Library G SC-15008-1
This software library provides uniform access to HDF-EOS2 and HDF-EOS5 files through one set of 
application program interface (API) calls. Without the library, programs would have to be written twice to 
cover both HDF-EOS2 and HDF-EOS5 files. 
Open Source
HDF-EOS5 Validator G SC-15015-1
This software allows generators of HDF-EOS data products to encode product requirement specifications in 
XML. The tool will then mechanically check product files against those requirements. 
Open Source
Hierarchical Data Format Earth Observing System (HDF-EOS) Data Extractor (HEEX) G SC-15009-1
The Hierarchical Data Format Earth Observing System (HDF-EOS) Data Extractor (HEEX) is a tool that 
enables users to extract HDF-EOS data to binary or ASCII data formats in HTML or XML index. The software 
can be used for both HDF-EOS2 and HDF-EOS5, and it automatically recognizes the two formats.
Open Source
Hierarchical Data Format Earth Observing System (HDF-EOS) Metadata Updater (HEMU) G SC-15010-1
HDF-EOS Metadata Updater (HEMU) enables users to modify metadata inside an HDF-EOS file (either 
HDF-EOS2 and HDF-EOS5). The tool can be used to extract metadata from a dataset to a text file that can 
then be modified with any text editor, replace metadata with text from an external file, or update metadata 
with text from an external file. 
Open Source
Hierarchical Data Format Earth Observing System (HDF-EOS) Web Server G SC-15011-1
This shell script chains together existing data usability group tools to: extract ODL metadata from an 
HDF-EOS file; convert the metadata to XML; reformat the XML into HTML; publish the HTML and the original 
HDF-EOS file to a Web server and an OPeNDAP server; and reformat the XML and submit it to the Earth 
Observing System Clearing House (ECHO).
Open Source
=====PAGE 107=====
98
Data Servers Processing and Handling
NASA Technology Transfer Program  Software Catalog 2025-26
Hierarchical Data Format Earth Observing System (HDF-EOS)  
XML Document-Type Definitions and Schemas G SC-15016-1
An XML standard has been developed for the HDF-EOS5 file format using document-type definitions and 
schemas. Users can transform HDF5 files into XML format and vice versa. 
Open Source
IND 2.1: Creation and Manipulation of Decision Trees from Data A RC-14529-1
Decision trees are commonly used in artificial intelligence and statistical pattern recognition. A tree is 
“grown” from data using a recursive-partitioning algorithm. IND re-implements parts of existing standard 
prediction algorithms, offers experimental control suites, and also introduces new, more sophisticated 
methods for growing decision trees.
Open Source
Information Sharing Protocol VCR (ISPVCR) M SC-25608-1
The Information Sharing Protocol (ISP) VCR (ISPVCR) is a software program written in Tcl/Tk that provides 
a capability to record and playback ISP data via Source Independent Telemetry Format (SITF) files. 
The ISPVCR provides a graphical user Interface that allows for start/stop of the recording capability; 
specification of output file names; and start/stop of the playback of the SITF data file.
U.S. Release Only
Inverse Reinforcement Learning (IRL) Augmentation for PyMDPToolbox A RC-17451-1
The software is a augmentation for PyMDPToolbox containing implementations of some new IRL algorithms.
Open Source
JavaGenes Genetic Graphs A RC-14293-1
JavaGenes is a genetic algorithm code written in Java. It evolves graphs using genetic software techniques 
and has applications in designing drugs, circuits, or any other system that is easily represented by graphs. 
Open Source
JavaGenes-Scheduler: Evolutionary Software for Earth-Observing Satellite Scheduling A RC-15103-1
JavaGenes-Scheduler is a general-purpose evolutionary system designed to compare techniques for 
scheduling observations. It was originally developed for scheduling observations made by Earth-observing 
satellites. JavaGenes-Scheduler uses a simple, earliest-first scheduler to insert observations into the 
timeline in permutation order.
Open Source
Juneberry Web Service Software NP O-48378-1
This software implements the open Webification API and provides ReSTful Web services for planetary 
image data in commonly used formats. It exposes content of planetary image data through meaningful 
URLs and enables the creation of applications on diverse platforms.
U.S. Government Purpose Release
Juneplum: ReSTful Web Access of OPeNDAP Hyrax Back-End Server N PO-49868-1
Juneplum is implemented as a Java servlet Web app and can be directly deployed into the same servlet 
engine that Hyrax front-end occupies. With Juneplum, any data product served by OPeNDAP is made 
simultaneously accessible in a fully ReSTful way
U.S. Government Purpose Release
=====PAGE 108=====
99
Data Servers Processing and Handling
NASA Technology Transfer Program  Software Catalog 2025-26
Large File Control (LFC) A RC-18988-1
LFC is an extension to the popular revision control software Git that enables it to work better with large 
and binary (non-text) files. It works by allowing the user to declare certain files as “large,” and then Git 
only lacks the metadata of that file while LFC handles the actual data in the large file. As a result, users are 
able to maintain the benefits of modern version control software, such as revision history, reproducibility, 
asynchronous collaboration, and ease of file transfer without having to download all historical versions of 
each binary file in the repository. This alleviates one of the major barriers to using Git for more applications 
outside of software development and especially helps to improve reproducibility in data science, 
computational aerosciences, or any other field with large data sets.
Open Source
Libbrace GSC-18186-1
In Linux/UNIX shells, it is possible to write a combination of strings in shorthand. For example test{0..3} 
would expand to test0, test1, test2, test3. Doing this in a C/C++ program currently involves launching a shell 
to perform the expansion. This library, Libbrace (Library Brace Expansions), performs the simple task of 
providing bash style brace expansions with the C Standard Library. This library itself is a simple rewrite of 
existing systems for use in the C/C++ programming language.
Open Source
libSPRITE  M FS-33231-1
libSPRITE was specifically designed for real-time systems that operate on a single computational node 
(but may be multi-core) to systematically address common coding errors, provide for multi-threaded 
programming to produce the exact same results regardless of the number of cores on the host compute 
node, and offer support for in-operation reconfigurability (parameter and control flow modifications). 
Components include engineering unit encoders, math functions, a task scheduler built on top of pthreads, a 
publish/subscribe data distribution system, and a Lua scripting language interface.
Open Source
MarsGIS Human Landing Site and Exploration Zone Viewer and Collaboration Tool L AR-19183-1
The innovation includes a GIS layer and a web-based GIS service. The GIS layer includes the geospatial 
location and spatial extent of the exploration zones (EZs), regions of interest, and data characterizing the 
science and resources purported to be available. The data was extracted from publicly available abstracts 
and presentations for the Human Landing Sites Study EZ Workshop in October 2015 as proposals for the 
first human landing site on Mars. The web-based service allows users to view and analyze this layer; verify, 
alter, and annotate data; and add/edit/delete new EZs and will support user collaboration on these data.  
The layer was developed under the auspices of a Systems Analysis and Concepts Directorate investment 
fund opportunity.
General Public Release
Mesh: Lightweight Grid Middleware Using Existing SSH Infrastructure A RC-15857-1
A lightweight grid middleware that is based on the addition of a single sign-on capability to the built-in public 
key authentication mechanism of SSH using system call interposition. The initial Mesh implementation is 
compatible with approximately 90% of the world’s SSH servers and any SSH client that supports public 
key authentication. Resources may be added to a Mesh-based grid in a matter of minutes using just three 
small files and two environment variable settings. Mesh adheres to fundamental security principles and 
was designed to be compatible with strong security mechanisms including two-factor authentication, SSH 
bastions, and restrictive firewalls. Several existing services have been integrated with Mesh to provide 
resource discovery and query, high performance file transfer, and job management.
Open Source
=====PAGE 109=====
100
Data Servers Processing and Handling
NASA Technology Transfer Program  Software Catalog 2025-26
Metadata Check G SC-15012-1
Metadata Check is a command-line tool to check Earth Observing System (EOS) metadata with a 
metadata descriptor. 
Open Source
Multi-Threaded Copy Program (MCP) A RC-16494-1
MCP is a high-performance file copy utility that achieves performance gains through parallelization. Multiple 
files and parts of single files are processed in parallel using multiple threads on multiple processors. The 
program employs the OpenMP and MPI programming models. 
Open Source
NASA Technology Transfer System (NTTS)  A RC-16564-1
The NASA Technology Transfer System (NTTS) is NASA’s enterprise system that captures NASA 
technologies. NTTS supports various technology transfer related activities and business processes.
U.S. Government Purpose Release
NASA UNIX Tool Kit K SC-12269
The NASA UNIX Tool Kit contains three components that all work together to form a single technology 
for UNIX administration. (1) Secure, Web-based UNIX System Administration Tools (KSC-12269) ease the 
administration of a large, distributed UNIX system, providing a secure mechanism for creating, modifying, 
locking, and deleting users. (2) The second component of the software kit is the Client/Server to create, 
modify, and query VERITAS File System Quotas on an NFS-Mounted File System with a Secure Web-based 
Interface (KSC-12268). In this technology, the client (which exists on an internal secure platform with a 
secure interface) can be accessed from any authorized platform capable of running a Web browser. The 
server software exists on a UNIX platform configured with the VERITAS file system. (3) The Web-based IP 
Address Tool (KSC-12271) provides an easy-to-use system for maintaining IP address information for  
a network of computers.
General Public Release
Netmark eXtensible DataBase, Data Access,  
and Retrieval Composition (XDB3-DARC) A RC-16119-1B
This innovation will query using a suite of operators in the Netmark/XDB query language to retrieve elements 
based on the absolute value of tags in the XML source. In an earlier version of the software, element retrieval 
was based solely on “full-text” term searches of the tags and their values. 
Open Source
NETMARK, Version 3.0 A RC-15722-1A
NETMARK 3.0 utilizes the same API as the previous versions but includes a rebuilt backend system utilizing 
NoSQL database technology. NETMARK 3.0 also introduces JSON output (in addition to the previously 
available XML output).
U.S. Government Purpose Release
Network Management and Monitoring System for Delay/Disruption-Tolerant Networks G SC-17596-1
This software allows a user to manage and monitor a challenged network of remote nodes. 
Open Source
NEXUS: Deep Data Platform N PO-50157-1
NEXUS provides a bridge between science data and horizontal-scaling data analysis. It provides a workflow 
to divide science artifacts into small data tiles to store in a cloud-scaled database where they can be quickly 
retrieved through a high-performance spatial search registry. Through spatial index, NEXUS provides fast 
access to all relevant data tiles where each tile fits into RAM for fast in-memory computation.
Open Source
=====PAGE 110=====
101
Data Servers Processing and Handling
NASA Technology Transfer Program  Software Catalog 2025-26
NodeMon: A Visualization Tool For Monitoring System Resource Utilization A RC-15771-1
NodeMon allows distributed resource monitoring via a growler software infrastructure. The tool is tailored to 
the Altix architecture but is applicable to any Linux system. Individual modules will monitor CPU, memory, 
and numalink activity. NodeMon will compose large amounts of statistical information and display it through 
a single graphical window.
Open Source
Oceanographic Data Management and Archive System N PO-47934-1
The Physical Oceanography Distributed Active Archive Center (PO.DAAC) is the center for oceanographic 
data for the NASA Earth Science Data and Information System (ESDIS). The primary function of PO.DAAC  
is to ingest, validate, archive, and distribute oceanographic artifacts.
Open Source
Open GeoSocial Consumer Application G SC-17162-1
This software interface provides a social and collaborative environment to allow end-users to discover, 
visualize, and access Earth science information on demand from simple browsers and share the resulting 
products with their friends and/or community of interest through social networks.
Open Source
Open Kloud Apt Package Interface (OKAPI) G SC-19346-1
OKAPI is a lightweight layer on top of package management repositories. Its purpose is to serialize adding 
new packages to an s3 package repository and to ensure the user making requests is authorized.
Open Source
Optimal Alarm System Design and Implementation A RC-16561-1
An alarm system that can robustly predict a level-crossing event that is specified over a fixed prediction 
horizon. Given a specific modeling paradigm that can be learned using appropriate data-driven or machine 
learning techniques, an optimal alarm system can be designed to elicit the fewest false alarms for a fixed 
detection probability. During implementation, value prediction of future process values can subsequently 
be used to enable the prediction of associated level-crossing events that may occur in the future, using a 
parameter that was selected to achieve robustly optimal performance during the alarm system design stage. 
Open Source
Perl 6 DBPg PostgreSQL Module G SC-18031-1
PostgreSQL is an open-source relational database management system. This module provides a rich 
interface to the PostgreSQL libpq library for Perl 6. It includes capabilities for prepared query caching, 
database connection caching, exception handling, flexible type conversion (including Boolean, date, date/
time, byte arrays, etc.), bulk data copy in and out, listen/notify, transactions, and cursors for large query 
processing.
Open Source
Perl 6 Epoll G SC-18030-1
This simple wrapper exposes the Linux Epoll(7) I/O event notification facility within Perl 6.
Open Source
Perl 6 Eredis Bindings Module G SC-17829-1
These Perl 6 bindings and modules are for interacting with the Redis database system.
Open Source
=====PAGE 111=====
102
Data Servers Processing and Handling
NASA Technology Transfer Program  Software Catalog 2025-26
Perl 6 GraphQL G SC-17798-1
A Perl 6 implementation of the Facebook GraphQL standard query language.
Open Source
Perl 6 Libarchive:  
Interface to Libarchive Multi-Format Archive And Compression Library G SC-18241-1
Provides a Perl 6 interface to the widely used libarchive multi-format archive and compression library. 
The functionality is supplied by the underlying library. This module provides a very easy to use high-level 
interface to that existing functionality.
Open Source
Perl 6 LibCurl G SC-17847-1
This module is a Perl 6 interface to the C LibCurl library. It includes Perl 6 native call bindings for accessing 
functionality and an object-oriented layer on top.
Open Source
Pinpoint GSC-19159-1
Pinpoint is a utility to generalize the location of data. This allows for the storage infrastructure to morph over 
time and utilize new technologies while data access for users remains consistent.
Open Source
PSYCO: A Predicate-Based Symbolic Compositional Reasoning Environment A RC-17644-1
PSYCO is a software environment that generates precise Java component interfaces which describe legal 
sequences of method invocations of a component. Guards on method parameters are included in the 
automata transitions in order to capture more precisely the interface behavior of the component. The first 
software environment to combine symbolic approaches with automata learning, PSYCO uses a technique 
named concolic execution to compute guards and active automata learning to compute legal sequences of 
invocations. PSYCO’s concolic execution engine, JDART, handles many data types and scales to industrial 
and aerospace applications. 
Open Source
Remote Memory Access Protocol Target Node G SC-16467-1
This NASA technology provides SpaceWire design users with support for executing remote memory access 
protocol read and write commands. The target IP core is a VHDL description suitable for implementation in 
a field-programmable gate array or an application-specific integrated circuit.
U.S. Release Only
Retools: Restriping Tools for Lustre A RC-16873-1
A set of modifications to the commonly used open-source utilities bzip2, gzip, rsync, and tar that 
automatically selects the stripe size for created and/or extracted files according to the sizes of the files 
involved. 
Open Source
Receiver Operating Characteristic (ROC) Curve Code Augmentation A RC-17529-1
This release extends existing open-source software’s capabilities and functionality by bookkeeping more 
detailed information on internal data structures, as well as enhanced error and special condition checking. 
Additional performance criteria have also been included, such as computing the AUC (Area under the ROC 
curve), pAUC (partial AUC), and other relevant statistics such as accuracy, confusion matrices, precision, 
recall, etc. 
Open Source
=====PAGE 112=====
103
Data Servers Processing and Handling
NASA Technology Transfer Program  Software Catalog 2025-26
Self-Healing Independent File Transfer (Shift) A RC-16940-1
A lightweight framework for high performance local and remote file transfers that provides resiliency across 
a wide variety of failure scenarios through various techniques. 
Open Source 
Simple Subset Wizard (SSW) G SC-16375-1
The Simple Subset Wizard (SSW) makes searching for granules easier. The tool unites the search function 
with various subsetters to deliver a single, simple, seamless process. SSW uses OpenSearch to query the 
Earth Observing System Clearing House (ECHO) for granules and then employs individual subset agents to 
submit requests. The SSW currently has 11 agents to interface with different subsetters, which support the 
subsetting of 217 EOSDIS data sets. The SSW provides the capability to subset by either temporal range or 
spatial region, although not all subsetters have both of these capabilities.
Open Source
Simple, Scalable, Script-Based Science Processing Archive (S4PA) G SC-15877-1
Simple, Scalable, Script-Based, Science Processing (S4P) Archive (S4PA) is a disk-based archiving 
system for remote sensing data. The tool can be used for new data transfer, data preprocessing, metadata 
generation, and data archival. Services provided include data access control, data subscription, metadata 
publication, and data recovery. All data are archived on readily available disk drives, with FTP and HTTP 
being the primary modes of data access. S4PA includes a graphical user interface for monitoring and 
re-configuring system operation. 
Open Source
Software Suite to Support In-Flight Characterization of Remote Sensing Systems S SC-00393
A software suite, developed to support NASA’s in-flight characterization of commercial remote sensing 
systems, efficiently automates reproducible processing of ground truth data. It is unique in that it takes input 
from a number of disparate data sources and condenses and rapidly processes it to a form useable by the 
characterization process.
General Public Release
Space Station Research Explorer (SSRE) App, Version 5.0 M SC-26214-1
Explore the diverse ecosystem of experiments being researched on the International Space Station – both 
completed and ongoing. Investigate the results and benefits of many of the experiments and find out why 
performing research in a microgravity environment is so important. The Space Station Research Explorer 
provides current information on ISS experiments, facilities, and research results through video, photos, 
interactive media, and in-depth descriptions. Downloads are available on Apple or Google App Stores (no 
agreement with NASA needed).
General Public Release
SSHIM: SSH Interruption Mitigator A RC-18335-1
A tool that allows remote commands operating over SSH channels to continue operation across multiple 
failures of the underlying channel.
Open Source
=====PAGE 113=====
104
Data Servers Processing and Handling
NASA Technology Transfer Program  Software Catalog 2025-26
STAMiNA NPO-45213-1
Utilizing STAMiNA, a simulation tool for the Advanced Sensors Collaborative Technology Alliance 
Microsensor Network Architecture, users can define: mission environment including terrain features; a 
sensed object set including multiple threat objects; sensor placements, their modalities, and their abilities 
to sense different object types; threat object trajectories; sensing and sensed data dissemination for 
information fusion; and various network configurations and formations between sensors to examine the 
coupling of sensing and communication. With these features, STAMiNA provides an overall system-level 
performance of different sensor network architectures under different parametric conditions.
U.S. Government Purpose Release
State Chart Autocoder N PO-47810-1
This NASA technology automatically generates code from UML/SysML state-machine models specified  
in the MagicDraw modeling tool. Input is saved as XML data files, and output is provided by the state- 
machine implementation code in C, C++, Python, or Promela. A test suite validates output products, and 
a test harness allows a developer to execute and animate a model with a graphical state-machine monitor. 
This monitor can run as either a standalone tool or as an Eclipse plug-in to MagicDraw.
U.S. Government Purpose Release
Synchronization, Archival, Validation, and IP Exchange (Save) A RC-16445-1
Save is a high-availability framework that manages IP addresses shared between multiple servers. It also 
monitors the health of those servers to determine which one should be actively servicing requests at any 
given time. Synchronization mechanisms allow configuration files to be kept consistent between systems 
and also allow commands to be executed across all servers of a particular type. Archival mechanisms 
provide automatic version control of configuration files to aid in recovery in case of errant configuration.
Open Source
User-Friendly Metadata (UFM) G SC-15014-1
The User-friendly Metadata (UFM) tool functions as a filter. The tool accepts an ODL file as input and generates 
a simple HTML representation of the ODL as output. Command-line options provide a user with the ability to 
modify the program’s functionality. 
Open Source
=====PAGE 114=====
105105
Design and  
Integration Tools
Vehicle/Payload Modeling and Analysis, Component 
and Integrated System Simulation
105105
Firefly Aerospace’s Blue Ghost lunar lander is encapsulated inside SpaceX’s rocket fairing ahead of its liftoff on Jan. 
15, 2025, from NASA’s Kennedy Space Center in Florida. On March 2, Blue Ghost stuck the first fully successful Moon 
landing of the space agency’s Commercial Lunar Payload Services initiative.  Credit: NASA
=====PAGE 115=====
106
Design and Integration Tools
NASA Technology Transfer Program  Software Catalog 2025-26
Featured Software
TetrUSS Computational Fluid Dynamics Software (TetrUSS) L AR-16882-1
The most awarded software in the history of NASA, TetrUSS is a suite of computer programs used for 
fluid dynamics and aerodynamics analysis and design. The software is widely used in other government 
organizations, the aerospace industry, academia, and non-aerospace industries such as automotive, 
biomedical, and civil engineering.
U.S. Release Only
Failure Modes and Effects Analysis Tool (FMEA) M SC-25379-1
This prototype failure analysis software tool models a system’s components, their connective relationships, 
and their functions in order to assist in failure modes and effect analysis (FMEA) early in the design life cycle. 
The technology semi-automatically generates a model with functions and failure modes to support FMEA.
General Public Release
Automated Triangle Geometry Processing for Surface Modeling  
and Cartesian Grid Generation (Cart3D) A RC-14275-1
Cart3D is a high-fidelity inviscid analysis package for conceptual and preliminary aerodynamic design. It 
allows users to perform automated computational fluid dynamics (CFD) analysis on complex geometry. The 
package includes utilities for geometry import, surface modeling and intersection, mesh generation, and 
flow simulation. Cart3D is highly automated so that geometry acquisition and mesh generation can usually 
be performed within a matter of minutes on most modern UNIX workstations or PCs.
U.S. Government Purpose Release
106
=====PAGE 116=====
107
Design and Integration Tools
NASA Technology Transfer Program  Software Catalog 2025-26
42: A Comprehensive General-Purpose Simulation of Attitude and Trajectory Dynamics  
and Control of Multiple Spacecraft Composed of Multiple Rigid or Flexible Bodies G SC-16720-1
This is a simulator of spacecraft attitude, orbit dynamics, and environmental models. Spacecraft models 
composed of multiple bodies are supported. The environment models include ephemerides for all planets 
and major moons in the solar system. The simulator is open-source and portable across computing 
platforms, making it customizable and extensible. It is written to support the entire GNC design cycle, from 
rapid prototyping and design analysis to high-fidelity flight code verification.
Open Source
Advanced Graphics for Engineering Analysis (AGEA) version 5.7.3  M SC-27334-1
AGEA is a three-dimensional visualization and analysis application that provides modeling and animation 
tools for real-time and pre-rendered simulations. It is a front-end application that relies on a collection of 
functions known as the IGOAL Graphics Library (IGL).
U.S. Release Only
Architecture Adaptive Computing Environment (ACE) G SC-14911-1
The Architecture Adaptive Computing Environment (ACE) is a parallel computing language, compiler, and 
runtime library. The purpose of ACE is to allow a programmer to more easily write parallel programs for  
a wide variety of parallel computer architectures.
Open Source
Arnold Mirror Modeler Software M FS-33271-1
This software creates complex finite element models of large-format, lightweight mirrors for complete input 
decks. Before, building these models could take engineers weeks or even months to complete a single 
iteration. Now the modeler tool can do the same task in minutes. The software creates many levels of model 
complexity, from single mirrors (circular or hexagonal shapes) to arrays of mirror segments. Models can  
have local reinforcement surrounding attachment points, and mesh can be refined (doubled) as many times 
as necessary.
U.S. Government Purpose Release
Assert-Based Unit Test Tools G SC-16689-1
These tools provide a framework and a collection of utilities designed to facilitate unit testing. They 
implement an assertion-based philosophy that requires the developer to explicitly write verification 
statements that assert whether a condition is true or false. In order to use the tools, the developer populates 
the framework with the ut-assert library to create an executable.
Open Source
Automated Triangle Geometry Processing for Surface Modeling  
and Cartesian Grid Generation (Cart3D) A RC-14275-1
Cart3D is a high-fidelity inviscid analysis package for conceptual and preliminary aerodynamic design. It 
allows users to perform automated computational fluid dynamics (CFD) analysis on complex geometry. The 
package includes utilities for geometry import, surface modeling and intersection, mesh generation, and 
flow simulation. Cart3D is highly automated so that geometry acquisition and mesh generation can usually 
be performed within a matter of minutes on most modern UNIX workstations or PCs.
U.S. Government Purpose Release
 
=====PAGE 117=====
108
Design and Integration Tools
NASA Technology Transfer Program  Software Catalog 2025-26
Basic Comparison of Python, Julia, Matlab, IDL, R, Java, Scala, Fortran and C G SC-18111-1
This is a database of codes and test results evaluating the performance of several computer languages 
(Python, Julia, Matlab, IDL, R, Java, Scala, Fortran and C). The goal is to highlight the strengths and 
weaknesses of each language. The results (updated at least once a year) and source code are presented 
through a NASA website accessible to practitioners who need such information to determine which 
language is appropriate to accomplish a specific task. 
Open Source
Bearing Analysis Tool (BAT) M FS-31864-1
The Bearing Analysis Tool (BAT) allows detailed design of rolling element bearings rocket engine 
turbopumps and other applications. It includes a graphical user interface that greatly reduces the effort 
required to define analytical models for simulation and design.
U.S. Release Only
Beyond Low-Earth Orbit (LEO) Architecture Sizing Tool (BLAST) M SC-25505-1
A user-friendly, configurable spacecraft sizing tool, BLAST provides a shareable, re-creatable and 
rigorous end-to-end multi-element architecture framework that has been used to generate mass data 
for in-space, beyond low-Earth orbit (LEO) transportation vehicles and architectures. Offering a novel 
approach to modeling, BLAST couples extensive MER research with the ability to assess mission changes 
instantaneously by analyzing sensitivity sweeps of several parameters at once.
U.S. Government Purpose Release
CCSDS SOIS Electronic Data Sheet Implementation for Core Flight System L EW-19710-1
This software is a set of tools that implement the Electronic Data Sheets specification from the CCSDS SOIS 
working group, compliant with book CCSDS book 876.0. The code integrates with the NASA Core Flight 
System to provide a robust EDS-based command, telemetry, and configuration solution.
Open Source
CFACS: Constrained Fitting for Airfoil Curvature Smoothing  L AR-17227-1
CFACS uses a spline-based airfoil smoothing method with the sum of squares of the third derivative jumps 
as a curvature smoothness measure. CFACS can take out dramatic curvature oscillations with extremely 
small geometry changes and smooth an airfoil segment without creating curvature oscillations near the 
endpoints. Visually, CFACS generates an unbiased smooth fit of the curvature profile. CFACS can smooth 
airfoils to either promote desirable performance characteristics or remove undesirable pressure field 
oscillations in computational fluid dynamics solutions.
U.S. Release Only
Chimera Grid Tools, Version 2.2 A RC-16025-1B
The Chimera Grid Tools software package is used for performing pre- and post-processing of 
computational fluid dynamics analysis on complex configurations using overset grids. It contains a 
collection of software tools for performing geometry processing, surface and volume grid generation, 
grid manipulation and diagnostics, flow solver input preparation, multi-body dynamics input preparation 
and animation, flow solution visualization, debris trajectory analysis input preparation, strand grid and 
AMR Cartesian grid visualization, flow solution post-processing analysis including forces and moments 
computation, and convergence history visualization.
U.S. Release Only
=====PAGE 118=====
109
Design and Integration Tools
NASA Technology Transfer Program  Software Catalog 2025-26
CMPGEN: A Modeling Tool Used to Compute Off-Design Performance of Fans,  
Boosters, and Compressors L EW-19686-1
CMPGEN is a modeling tool used to compute off-design performance of axial fans, boosters, and 
compressors. Users can obtain rapid and consistent off-design performance characteristics from simple 
design point inputs. Component performance maps are suitable for use in the Numerical Propulsion System 
Simulation (NPSS) gas turbine engine cycle analysis code output.
U.S. Release Only
Cobra Code Browser and Analyzer: An Extendable, Interactive Tool  
for the Analysis of C Code N PO-50050-1
This tool provides software developers, peer reviewers, testers, and quality assurance personnel with an 
interactive method that facilitates searching for patterns, confirms compliance or non-compliance with 
coding guidelines and coding standards, and identifies suspicious code fragments. Cobra uses a lexical 
analyzer for C to scan in source code. 
U.S. Government Purpose Release
CoCoSim: Simulink Verification Framework A RC-18277-1
This framework integrates analysis technologies for verifying and validating Simulink and Stateflow models. 
CoCoSim can be used to automatically perform test case generation and to evaluate the validity of user-
supplied safety requirements. Structured to operate much like a compiler, the software sequences a series 
of translation steps leading, eventually, to either the production of source code or to the call of a verification 
tool.
Open Source
Collection of Nonlinear Aircraft Simulations in MATLAB L AR-17463-1
This package includes nonlinear six degree-of-freedom simulations for a variety of aircraft created using 
MATLAB. Data for aircraft geometry, aerodynamic characteristics, mass/inertia properties, and engine 
characteristics have been obtained from open-literature publications documenting wind tunnel experiments 
and flight tests. Each nonlinear simulation has been implemented within a common framework and includes 
an interface with another commercially available program to read pilot inputs and produce a 3D display 
of the simulated airplane motion. Aircraft simulations include the General Dynamics F-16 Fighting Falcon, 
Convair F-106B Delta Dart, Grumman F-14 Tomcat, McDonnell Douglas F-4 Phantom, NASA Langley Free-
Flying Aircraft for Sub-scale Experimental Research (FASER), NASA HL 20 Lifting Body, NASA/DARPA X-31 
Enhanced Fighter Maneuverability Demonstrator, and the Vought A-7 Corsair II. 
U.S. Release Only
Computational Fluid Dynamics (CFD) Utility Software Library A RC-14467-1A
A collection of utility programs and reusable subroutine libraries supports computational fluid dynamics, 
particularly on multiblock structured grids. The technology is applicable to all flight regimes (subsonic,  
transonic, supersonic, and hypersonic). 
Open Source
Computational Fluids Laboratory 3-Dimensional (CFL3D) L AR-16003-1
CFL3D is a structured-grid, cell-centered, upwind-biased, Reynolds-averaged Navier-Stokes (RANS) 
code. It can be run in parallel on multiple grid zones with point-matched, patched, overset, or embedded 
connectivities. Both multigrid and mesh sequencing are available in time-accurate or steady-state modes. 
Open Source
=====PAGE 119=====
110
Design and Integration Tools
NASA Technology Transfer Program  Software Catalog 2025-26
Configuration-Based Aerodynamics (CBAero)  A RC-15819-1
CBAero is a software tool for the prediction of the conceptual aero-thermodynamic environments of 
aerospace configurations. The vehicle geometry is defined using unstructured, triangulated surface meshes. 
For subsonic Mach numbers a fast, unstructured, multi-pole panel code is coupled with a streamline tracing 
formulation to define the viscous surface solution. For supersonic and hypersonic Mach numbers, various 
independent panel methods are coupled with the streamline tracing formulation, attachment line detection 
methods, and stagnation-attachment line heating models to define the viscous aero-thermal environment.
U.S. Release Only
Constrained Direct Iterative Surface Curvature (CDISC) Aerodynamic Design Software L AR-18693-1
CDISC is a system of software codes that, when coupled with computational fluid dynamics flow solvers, 
provides a method for aerodynamic design. The core design algorithm uses prescribed flow/geometry 
sensitivity derivatives to make geometry changes based on the difference between target and analysis  
pressures on the surface of the configuration being designed. The target pressures can be directly 
specified or may be generated using the flow constraint options in CDISC that modify the current 
analysis pressures to meet common engineering quantities such as lift and pitching moment. Geometry 
constraints, such as wing thickness or curvature, are also included to meet requirements from other 
disciplines such as structures and manufacturing. 
U.S. Release Only
Copernicus Trajectory Design and Optimization System, Version 5.3.2 M SC-26673-1
Copernicus solves a wide range of trajectory optimization problems, including those involving trajectories 
centered about any planet or moon in our solar system, trajectories influenced by two or more celestial 
bodies, such as libration point trajectories (halo orbits) and distant retrograde orbits, Earth-Moon and 
interplanetary transfers, asteroid and comet missions, and more. Copernicus 5.3.2 is a significant update, 
adding new Python features, such as a scripting interface, API, plugins, a modern GUI that is fully functional 
on Windows, Linux, and MacOS, as well as many other new features, options, and bug fixes.
U.S. Government Purpose Release
Core Flight System Simulink Interface Layer (SIL) G SC-18115-1
This is a software abstraction layer allowing task or mission-specific code generated from Simulink (or other 
sources) to interface with the Core Flight System (CFS) via a generic set of wrapper code. SIL simplifies the 
integration of code as a CFS application and eliminates the need for hand edits to generated code, allowing 
quicker integration of code and reducing the probability of human error.
Open Source
Data Parallel Line Relaxation Code (DPLR), Version 4 A RC-16021-1A
The DPLR software package is a suite of CFD tools for the computation of supersonic and hypersonic flows 
in chemical and thermal nonequilibrium. Included in the package are 2D/axisymmetric and 3D structured-
grid finite volume Navier-Stokes codes, a pre-processor, and a post-processor. The code supports implicit 
boundary conditions, generalized multi-block topologies, grid alignment to flow features, and  
generalized chemical kinetics and thermodynamic property databases.
U.S. Government Purpose Release
DB90: Fortran Callable Relational Database L AR-20040-1
DB90 is intended for use with scientific and engineering computer programs that require relational database 
functionality. The database software is written in Fortran and conforms to the Fortran 2003 programming 
language standard. The DB90 functional interoperability is targeted for scientific and engineering software 
that also is written in Fortran; however, DB90 is compatible with software written in any language that allows 
for making calls to executable Fortran subroutines. It should be portable to any computing platform and 
operating system with a Fortran 2003 compiler.
General Public Release
=====PAGE 120=====
111
Design and Integration Tools
NASA Technology Transfer Program  Software Catalog 2025-26
dcapp: Displays and Controls Application M SC-26476-1
dcapp provides a simple interface for building and running displays and controls on a desktop or laptop 
computer. It processes user inputs, typically mouse clicks and keyboard entries, and renders displays to 
the computer screen based upon the data fed to it. Designed for UNIX platforms, specifically MacOS and 
Linux, it has built-in communication libraries to communicate with external Trick-based simulations and 
EDGE graphics.
U.S. Government Purpose Release
Dyreqt Version 2 M FS-34790-1
Dyreqt provides a general capability for synthesis of space transportation architectures in the preconceptual 
and conceptual phases of design. Rather than focusing on sizing, the primary aim of Dyreqt is enabling 
flexible synthesis of any arbitrary architecture element models that may be described within Dyreqts 
ontology. In doing this, Dyreqt enables the rapid exploration and optimization of architecture concepts 
subject to parametric requirements regardless of the high-/low-/mixed-/multi-fidelity nature of the models 
used.
U.S. Government Purpose Release
Earth Surface Bistatic Scattering Coefficient Prediction Model L EW-20332-1
This MATLAB code package provides tools for predicting the bistatic scattering coefficients and coherent 
reflection coefficients for the water surfaces and land surfaces. These models can be applied at any 
elevation angle, except grazing incidence, and they work for frequencies between 1 and 100 GHz. For 
frequencies less than 1 GHz, the coherent component may be the dominant source of any interference 
effects, greatly simplifying the required modelling of Earth surface reflections. This MATLAB code 
implements internationally recognized standard Recommendation ITU-R P.2146-0 and conforms to 
established validation examples developed and approved by the International Telecommunications Union 
(ITU-R). The package also leverages three analytic models that are widely used in academic literature for 
modeling bistatic scattering coefficients: Small perturbation model (SPM); Kirchhoff approximation model 
(KA), and the two scale scattering model (TSSM).
Open Source
Earth System Digital Twin Software Framework N PO-52671-1
This software system enables generalized orchestration and interoperability of scientific models. In 
combination with continuous onboarding of near-real-time satellite and insitu observations, this enables 
forecasting and prediction of scenarios such as flooding.
General Public Release
Evolutionary Mission Trajectory Generator (EMTG) Version 9.02 G SC-19380-1
The Evolutionary Mission Trajectory Generator (EMTG) version 9.02 is a scalable-fidelity optimization 
package for space trajectory design. EMTGv9 is suitable for trade studies, sensitivity analysis, and serves 
as an initial guess generator for a flight fidelity tool. EMTG can design missions using high-thrust chemical 
propulsion or low-thrust electric propulsion. Included in this release is the Python EMTG Automated Trade 
Study Application (PEATSA) for trade analysis.
Open Source
Exploration Visualization Environment, Version 2.15 L AR-19859-1
The Exploration Visualization Environment (EVE) is a simulation, visualization, and analysis system 
developed to support the design and planning of space-based missions. Through the integration of 
time dependent data with detailed graphical models within a full scale three dimensional solar system 
or independent reference frame, the analyst can gain valuable insight into the correlation of data with 
simulation events. Version 2.15 of EVE has been built upon previously released versions, enhancing analysis 
capabilities, greater usability, and enhanced input and output features. EVE has been developed to run 
cross platform under Linux, Windows and Mac.
U.S. Government Purpose Release
=====PAGE 121=====
112
Design and Integration Tools
NASA Technology Transfer Program  Software Catalog 2025-26
Extended Testability Analysis (ETA) Tool, Version 8.0 L EW-19241-1
This technology is a NASA Glenn-developed software application that supports fault management (FM) by 
performing testability analyses on the fault propagation model of a given system.
U.S. Release Only
Failure Modes and Effects Analysis Tool (FMEA) M SC-25379-1
This prototype failure analysis software tool models a system’s components, their connective relationships, 
and their functions in order to assist in failure modes and effect analysis (FMEA) early in the design life cycle.  
The technology semi-automatically generates a model with functions and failure modes to support FMEA.
General Public Release
Fault Model Design Tools: fmdtools Version 2 A RC-18750-1A
Fmdtools is a Python toolkit for simulating the dynamic effects of hazardous scenarios in complex 
engineered systems and analyzing the associated resilience of the system. To support early design work, 
fmdtools uses a high-level representation of the system which can evolve as the concept increases in 
fidelity. The three main components of the fmdtools package are model definition constructs that enable 
early specification of the high-level structure and behaviors of a system, simulation methods to quantify 
system performance and propagation of hazards over a range of scenarios, and analysis methods for 
quantifying resilience and summarizing and visualizing behaviors and properties of interest. Put together, 
these components comprise a design, simulation, and analysis environment that can be used to consider 
the resilience of a system of interest in the design process. The 2.0 version of fmdtools adds modeling 
constructs and the ability to modify and search model parameters and states (before and within the 
simulation) that could increase system resilience or drive the system to failure.
Open Source
Flight Dynamics Simulation of a Generic Transport Model L AR-17625-1
This software is a flight dynamics simulation of a transport aircraft. It implements general rigid body 
equations of motion for the vehicle dynamics and draws aerodynamic forces from a standard coefficient 
expansion implemented as table lookups. Dynamics of actuator servos and bandwidth of sensors are also 
included. The simulation is coded in Simulink, a model-based environment using a commercial simulation 
package from MathWorks, Inc. The software is not standalone; it must be run from inside this commercial 
environment, making use of numerical libraries for basic operations, as well as the overall time-stepping and 
numerical integration routines.
Open Source
FIAT: Fully Implicit Ablation and Thermal Analysis Program, Version 3 A RC-15779-1A
FIAT v3 simulates one-dimensional thermal energy transport in a multilayer stack of isotropic materials and 
structures that can ablate from the front surface and decompose in depth. The implicit solution algorithm 
and general solution technique make the program very stable and robust for application to both robotic and 
crewed vehicles entering a planetary atmosphere from space. For input, the code reads material property 
information from a database file.
U.S. and Foreign Release
General MACOS Interface (GMI) for Modeling and  
Analysis for Controlled Optical Systems (MACOS) N PO-48009-1
The General MACOS Interface (GMI) enables the use of MATLAB as a front-end for MACOS, JPL ’s in-house 
optical modeling software. GMI, coupled with MACOS, allows for seamless interfacing with modeling tools 
from other disciplines to make possible integration of dynamics, structures, and thermal models. GMI is 
a significant enhancement for MACOS as it provides a simple but effective framework to interface with 
MACOS using MATLAB as computational development platform. GMI was originally developed for the 
James Webb Space Telescope project.
General Public Release
=====PAGE 122=====
113
Design and Integration Tools
NASA Technology Transfer Program  Software Catalog 2025-26
General Mission Analysis Tool (GMAT), Version R2022a G SC-19097-1
GMAT is a software system for trajectory optimization, mission analysis, trajectory estimation, and 
prediction. Analysts use GMAT to design spacecraft trajectories, optimize maneuvers, perform orbit 
determination, visualize and communicate mission parameters, and understand a mission trade space. 
GMAT contains models of real-world objects such as spacecraft and thrusters, as well as analysis “objects” 
such as plots and reports. These objects are used in the mission sequence wherein the user employs 
commands supported by the system to model missions and perform estimation. 
Open Source
General-Use Nodal Network Solver (GUNNS), Version 19.X M SC-26727-1
This solver combines standard nodal circuit analysis algorithms with the hydraulic-thermal-electric analogy 
to allow modeling of flow circuits (fluid, thermal, electrical) with a concise set of generic code. Circuits are 
drawn up with a Draw.io drawing, from which run-time C++ code is auto-generated that can be built into 
simulations. The software includes custom Draw.io shapes for generic physical components like pumps, 
valves, resistors, and capacitors. These can be connected to each other in the drawing and configured with 
their characteristic values. 
Open Source
Genesis Flight Mechanics Simulation and Trajectory Design Tool Version 0.3.0  M SC-27061-1
Genesis is a generic, multi-vehicle, variable-degree-of-freedom flight mechanics simulation for trajectory 
design. It is capable of modeling ascent, aerocapture, entry, descent, and landing trajectories around 
a single planetary body. It is designed to be flexible and easily reconfigured for new vehicles. Genesis 
provides generic models for atmospheric properties, winds, aerodynamics, and propulsion. It can easily be 
extended with new environment, vehicle, or flight software models. Genesis can be used for a wide variety 
of analyses, ranging from optimizing a single trajectory to running a large Monte Carlo analysis in a High-
Performance Computing (HPC) environment. It consolidates and replaces a suite of legacy flight mechanics 
simulations. It is implemented in the Julia programming language.
U.S. Government Purpose Release
Global Modeling Initiative (GMI) Software G SC-15363-1
The Global Modeling Initiative (GMI) is a state-of-the-art, modular 3D chemistry and transport model (CTM) 
that can be used for assessment of the impact of various natural and anthropogenic perturbations on  
atmospheric composition and chemistry, including but not exclusively the effect of aircraft.
U.S. Government Purpose Release
Goddard Satellite Data Simulation Unit G SC-15874-1
The Goddard Satellite Data Simulation Unit (SDSU) is a comprehensive unified system of multi-sensor satellite 
instrumental simulators. Skill of weather forecasting models can be evaluated in terms of satellite-observed 
multi-sensor radiance levels. Alternatively, the remote sensing community can more readily utilize atmospheric 
model simulations to develop and test their retrieval algorithms for application of Earth science.
Open Source
GTM_Polysim: Nonlinear GTM Aircraft Polynomial Simulation in MATLAB, Version 2.0 L AR-17595-1
The GTM_POLYSIM is a nonlinear simulation of the Generic Transport Model (GTM) aircraft at a 5.5-percent 
scale. The simulation software is a collection of scripts and programs written and executed in the MATLAB 
computing environment.
U.S. Release Only
=====PAGE 123=====
114
Design and Integration Tools
NASA Technology Transfer Program  Software Catalog 2025-26
HLA2MPC, Version 3.0: A Software Bridge Between the IEEE 1516 High-Level  
Architecture to the NASA MPC Model Process Control (MPC) 3.0 Telemetry Language K SC-14109
HLA2MPC provides the link between HLA (High Level Architecture, IEEE 1516) Simulation Federation data 
and any MPC3- compliant simulation or visualization tool. One such tool is DON, the Distributed Observer 
Network, now in version 3.1. 
Open Source
HybridQ: A Hybrid Simulator for Quantum Circuits  A RC-18652-1
HybridQ is a powerful tool to simulate large scale quantum circuits. It uses different numerical techniques 
(including tensor contraction, direct evolution of the quantum state and Pauli operator expansion) and it has 
been specifically designed to run on HPC cluster. It also offers an user-friendly interface to allow users with 
any background to use HybridQ, without any prior knowledge of high-performance computing.
Open Source
Image Motion Optical Transfer Function and Pointing Performance  
Analysis Toolbox (IMOTF-PPA Toolbox) L AR-20263-1
The Image Motion Optical Transfer Function and Pointing Performance Analysis (IMOTF-PPA) Toolbox is a 
set of MATLAB (and Octave) functions to evaluate image motion effects on image quality for optical systems 
subject to mechanical disturbances. Image motion includes displacement (shift), smear, jitter, broadband 
noise, tonal and multi-tonal motion, and exponential deceleration. The toolbox functions support optical 
performance analysis and pointing performance analysis. Example scripts demonstrate each function and 
reduce the learning curve, and the scripts can be incorporated into the design and analysis software. Each 
function and example is documented in the User’s Manual and in command-line help. The User’s Manual 
includes technical background and recommendations to use the Toolbox correctly, and it cites important 
and pertinent publications.
General Public Release
IMCE Ontological Modeling Framework N PO-49756-1
The Jet Propulsion Laboratory’s Integrated Model-Centric Engineering (IMCE) initiative developed 
ontologies for Model-Based Systems Engineering (MBSE) to support JPL ’s MBSE practices and 
methodologies. The IMCE ontologies have been carefully engineered to provide support for scalable query 
and reasoning according to the semantics of the Ontology Web Language (OWL) standard in such a way 
that these ontologies can be mapped as extensions of the Unified Modeling Language (UML) and Systems 
Modeling Language (SysML) standards. 
Open Source
Incompressible Navier-Stokes CFD Solver (INS3D) A RC-14020-1
The INS3D code solves the incompressible Navier-Stokes equations in three-dimensional generalized 
coordinates for both steady-state and time-varying flow. The equations are formulated using artificial 
compressibility. The convective terms are differenced using an upwind biased flux-difference splitting. The 
equations are solved using an implicit line-relaxation scheme. The code is written for single- or multiple-
zone calculations. It can utilize either pointwise continuous zonal interfaces or overset zonal interfaces  
if a PEGASUS interpolation database is supplied. 
U.S. Release Only
INGOT: INtegrated GPU ODE Toolbox N PO-52867-1
INGOT uses the GPU to solve Ordinary Differential Equations using the RKF family of algorithms.
General Public Release
=====PAGE 124=====
115
Design and Integration Tools
NASA Technology Transfer Program  Software Catalog 2025-26
Integrated Composite Analyzer in JAVA (ICAN/JAVA) L EW-17247-1
ICAN/JAVA, the Integrated Composite Analyzer written in Java, was primarily designed to analyze the 
hygrothermomechanical response and properties of fiber- or particulate-reinforced, resin-matrix-layered 
composite materials, given the local membrane loads and bending moments. ICAN/JAVA was coded in 
the Java computer language combining features from earlier versions for both fibers and particulates, as 
well as adding impact modeling. The multi-factor interaction model allows factors to interact to allow for 
property changes due to operating conditions after fabrication. ICAN/JAVA has both a batch version and an 
interactive version that can also plot selected outputs.
U.S. Release Only
Integrated Lunar Information Architecture for Decision Support (ILIADS), Version 3.0 G SC-16210-1
ILIADS 3.0 provides the data management capabilities to access CxP-vetted lunar data sets from the LMMP-
provided Data Portal and the LMMP-provided OnMoon lunar data product server. (LMMP stands for Lunar 
Mapping and Modeling Project.) It also provides specific quantitative analysis functions to meet the stated 
LMMP Level 3 functional and performance requirements specifications that were approved by the CxP.
Open Source
ION Network Model and Browser-based Configuration Tools N PO-51921-1
This package consists of a set of tools that allow a mission planner (without detailed protocol knowledge) 
to lay out the topology and basic link characteristics of a mission, create a json file describing that network, 
and then pass that to a protocol engineer for importing into the ION Configuration Tool for the detailed 
development of ION configuration files for all the nodes in the network. The tools are the DTN Network 
Model tool, and the ION Configuration Tool (detailed in NTR-50751)
General Public Release
ISS Systems Integration Lab (ISIL) Operations Framework (RIM 10) M SC-25380-1
The Software Development and Integration Laboratory (SDIL) in Sonny Carter supports ISS flight software 
development, integration, and verification. The complexity of the ISS requires efficient and reliable test 
reconfiguration, flexible resource scheduling, and effective workflow and also time-effective configuration 
management. An electronic workflow system was conceived and dubbed Rig Information Management 
(RIM). The SDIL was then transitioned from standalone manual systems to the RIM system with database-
centric, Web-based solutions enabling significant efficiencies and paperless operations. It also created 
productivity improvements in flight software development. This innovation was recognized with  
a JSC 2007 Exceptional Software Award.
U.S. Release Only
JSC Engineering Orbital Dynamics (JEOD) Version 5.x  M SC-27344-1
The JSC Engineering Orbital Dynamics (JEOD) Software Package contains a set of numerical mathematical 
models that provide vehicle or vehicles trajectory generation by the solution of a set of numerical dynamical 
models. These models are comprised of an environment model representing the gravitational and 
non-gravitational forces and torques acting on the vehicle or vehicles, dynamics models for processing 
and numerically integrating the equations of motion, Interaction models representing interaction with the 
environment and a set of mathematical and orbital dynamics utilities.
Open Source
Knife Boolean Substraction Library for Polyhedra, Version 1.0 L AR-17481-1
The Knife library calculates the Boolean subtraction of arbitrary watertight triangular polyhedral in order to 
make near-field sonic boom predictions. 
Open Source
=====PAGE 125=====
116
Design and Integration Tools
NASA Technology Transfer Program  Software Catalog 2025-26
Koviz: A Simulation Data Analysis, Visualization And Mining Tool M SC-26621-1
This is a visualization tool designed for analyzing data from the Trick Simulation Environment, a framework 
also developed at Johnson which expedites the creation of simulations for all phases of space vehicle 
development. Koviz is specialized for handling large Monte Carlo data sets and doing real-time analyses 
of Trick simulations.
Open Source
KSOPT: An Indirect Method for Numerical Optimization  
Using the Kreisselmeier-Steinhauser Function, Version 3.1 L AR-18488-1
This is a technique for converting a constrained optimization problem into an unconstrained problem. 
The software transforms one or more objective functions into reduced objective functions analogous to 
goal constraints used in the goal programming method. The reduced objective functions are appended 
to the set of constraints, and an envelope of the entire function set is computed using the Kreisselmeier-
Steinhauser function. 
U.S. Release Only
LEWICE3D, Version 3.63 L EW-19433-1
LEWICE3D is a software system capable of predicting the accumulation of ice on three-dimensional aircraft 
surfaces given the flight and meteorological conditions representative of an icing cloud. The software 
utilizes input information of the airflow surrounding the body of interest and then calculates trajectories of 
approaching water droplets, the mass and energy transfer processes at the surface of the body, and the 
resulting ice mass and the shape it will take on the body. 
U.S. Release Only
Light Gas Gun Performance Code (ONEDIM)  A RC-18153-1
This program calculates the performance of a two-stage light gas gun from first-stage powder burn through 
projectile exit from gun muzzle.
U.S. Release Only
Low-Fidelity Space Systems Analysis Tools: Body-Centric Insertion Tool L AR-18741-1
This tool is intended to support mission architecture designers to design simple orbits for vehicles entering 
into the sphere of influence of a planet from heliocentric space. It allows architects to put in information 
about the dV or C3 energy state and provide information about the desired parking orbit. From either C3 or 
dV, it calculates the remaining dV required to take the vehicle and place it in the desired orbit based on the 
planet and its sphere of influence.
U.S. Release Only
Low-Fidelity Space Systems Analysis Tools: Body-Centric Orbit Change Tool L AR-18746-1
This tool provides dV requirements for orbit changes in inclination, periapsis, and apoapsis.
U.S. Release Only
Low-Fidelity Space Systems Analysis Tools: Destination Campaign Tools L AR-18752-1
This tool provides a rough mass estimate of ground campaign equipment.
U.S. Release Only
Low-Fidelity Space Systems Analysis Tools: Fission Power Sizing Tool L AR-18745-1
This system uses lifetime, chosen archetype, and EOL power demand to determine the mass and power 
characteristics of a fission power system. 
U.S. Release Only
=====PAGE 126=====
117
Design and Integration Tools
NASA Technology Transfer Program  Software Catalog 2025-26
Low-Fidelity Space Systems Analysis Tools: Heliocentric Trajectory Tool L AR-18744-1
This tool is produced is take advantage of pre-existing resources of known lambert trajectory solutions to 
various bodies, NEAs and more. This database is created and maintained by Ames Research Center and 
provides a two-significant-figure estimate of the injection deltaV to get to the desired orbit and the insertion 
dV to stop at the location. Additionally, it does calculate flyby maneuver effects.
U.S. Release Only
Low-Fidelity Space Systems Analysis Tools: ISRU Demo Plant Sizing Tool L AR-18734-1
The Agile ISRU Demo Plant Sizing Tool will provide a rough parametric estimate of ISRU plant mass and 
power requirements based on fitting data to a heritage curve. NEO, Phobos, lunar surface, and Martian 
surface are included at a notional level within this system that allows architecture designers to roughly scale 
ISRU plants before talking to specialists.
U.S. Release Only
Low-Fidelity Space Systems Analysis Tools: Long-Duration Habitat Sizing Tool L AR-18737-1
This tool does parametric sizing of long term human habitats based on duration and crew size up  
to ten members.
U.S. Release Only
Low-Fidelity Space Systems Analysis Tools: Multiburn/Large-Vehicle Sizing Tool L AR-18733-1
This tool will design a large vehicle and do inert mass fraction sizing to scale a vehicle for multiple impulsive 
maneuvers and different payloads.
U.S. Release Only
Low-Fidelity Space Systems Analysis Tools: One-Way/Small-Vehicle Sizing Tool L AR-18739-1
This tool sizes small or one-way/one-time-use vehicles for propulsive maneuvers both in and out of 
atmosphere. The system will provide rough Figure of Merit (FOM) estimates of mass, power, volume, and 
ephemeris/trajectory change capacity and provide a rough breakdown of the inert masses, propulsive 
masses, and payload masses. Additionally, the system provides context for the mass breakdown and  
is intended for small vehicles doing one or two maneuvers. 
U.S. Release Only
Low-Fidelity Space Systems Analysis Tools: Orbiter Sizing Tool L AR-18736-1
This tool sizes rough orbiter buses that include avionics, science payloads (user choice), and a scientific 
mass fraction, and it produces a baseball card for presentation. 
U.S. Release Only
Low-Fidelity Space Systems Analysis Tools: Planetary Ascent/Descent dV Tool L AR-18743-1
This tool is designed to provide rough estimates for a landing on the surface of a planet with no atmosphere. 
Data from this tool are used to drive sizing calculations.
U.S. Release Only
Low-Fidelity Space Systems Analysis Tools: Rover Sizing Tool L AR-18735-1
This tool is intended to be used for scientific rover missions based on a heritage catalogue of scientific 
components, as well as relationships between scientific tool mass and total rover body mass.
U.S. Release Only
Low-Fidelity Space Systems Analysis Tools: Short-Duration Habitat Sizing Tool L AR-18738-1
This tool sizes short duration human habitats for short missions less than 20 days based on identified 
human operations requirements.
U.S. Release Only
=====PAGE 127=====
118
Design and Integration Tools
NASA Technology Transfer Program  Software Catalog 2025-26
Low-Fidelity Space Systems Analysis Tools: Solar Cell/Fuel Cell/Battery Sizing tool L AR-18740-1
This tool sizes solar power systems utilizing batteries, fuel cells, and solar cells and calculates the mass, 
power, and potential volume requirements of the system. It will provide a rough estimate of the sizes of the 
cells and the tank volumes and masses for the fuel cells and for determining decay rates and BOL/EOL 
power-generation demands. 
U.S. Release Only
Low-Fidelity Space Systems Analysis Tools: Thermal Protection System Sizing Tool L AR-18742-1
This system sizes Thermal Protection Systems based on simple flight path angle assessments and mass 
properties of the vehicle. It provides estimates of heat loads and relevant materials.
U.S. Release Only
Low-Order Potential Flow Panel Code (PMARC), Version 14 A RC-14407-1
PMARC is a three-dimensional panel code to solve potential flow around wings and bodies. Relative motion 
between multiple bodies can be simulated.
U.S. and Foreign Release
Machine Learning Key Utilities (MLky) NP O-52526-1
MLky is a Python configuration software package for data scientists. It is designed to be highly configurable 
and flexible to adapt to the evolving needs of data scientists. This facilitates research and pipeline 
development and provides a framework for software packages to step up their configurations from flexible 
prototypes to rigid release candidates.
General Public Release
MACOS Program Release, Version 3.31 N PO-45030-1
The Modeling and Analysis of Controlled Optical System (MACOS) Program is a JPL-developed major 
optical systems modeling and analysis software tool package. It enables a wide range of system-level 
engineering modeling and analysis for large aperture, segmented space telescope systems. MACOS Version 
3.31 adds a powerful system optimization facility with a set of optimization algorithms implemented for 
linear and nonlinear, unconstrained and constrained optical system optimizations under a variety of settings, 
enhanced ability to perturb optical system components individually and on subsystem level, a variety of new 
optical aperture types, and the ability to add multi-layer thin-film coatings to element surfaces in polarized 
ray-tracing. Major software engineering work was also performed on the MACOS program to make it more 
reliable, flexible, and manageable from the maintenance and development point of view.
General Public Release
Manipulator Analysis – Graphic, Interactive, Kinematic (MAGIK)  
Robotic Simulation, Version 8.1  M SC-27335-1
MAGIK is a robotic simulation used primarily to conduct interactive kinematic analysis of International Space 
Station robotic operations. MAGIK can be used to model, specify, simulate, analyze, and modify n-jointed 
manipulators using built-in control algorithms while displaying interactive, high-fidelity 3-dimensional graphic 
scenes of the robotic system and its environment. The graphics are provided by the companion package 
Advanced Graphics for Engineering Analysis (AGEA) – also developed at JSC.
U.S. Release Only
MBJEOD: An Integrated Multibody and Orbital Dynamics Simulation Module M SC-25732-1
MBJEOD is a multi-body dynamics (MBDyn) software interface layer that allows transfer of forces between 
multi-body articulating objects and the JEOD orbital dynamics package.
U.S. Government Purpose Release
=====PAGE 128=====
119
Design and Integration Tools
NASA Technology Transfer Program  Software Catalog 2025-26
MIPP-D: In-Situ Resource Utilization (ISRU)  
Propellant Production Discrete Event Simulation (DES) K SC-14131
MIPP-D is a Simio-based Discrete Event Simulation modeling Mars surface propellant production. The focus 
is on the actual chemical plant and processes, including incoming and outgoing materials associated with 
the production of rocket fuel on Mars. The fuel will be for the Mars Ascent Vehicle used to carry humans 
into space from the surface of Mars. The simulation utilizes NASA ground rules and assumptions, as well as 
data from prototype chemical plants, NASA experts, and literature. It is designed to grow in capability and 
complexity as needed or as additional information becomes available. The simulation does not attempt to 
model the complexities of surface elements acquiring feed stock or disposing of spent resources, although 
it does acknowledge those functions exist and uses informed assumptions where necessary.
U.S. Government Purpose Release
Mixed Reality Engineering Toolkit (MRET) G SC-18169-1
This toolkit can be used to create augmented and virtual reality tools for integrating spacecraft designs and 
real-time mission telemetry for multiple domains over a mission lifecycle, including pre-phase A concept 
design; hardware integration and test planning and execution; and tele-robotic operations. 
U.S. Government Purpose Release
Mixed Reality Exploration Toolkit (MRET) v2.0  G SC-18602-1
The Mixed Reality Exploration Toolkit (MRET) framework/platform advances NASA engineering and 
scientific efforts by leveraging industry advances in virtual reality (VR) and augmented reality (AR) 
technology to use NASA data and tools in new and innovative ways. MRET provides cross-domain, mission 
lifecycle support by integrating NASA “models” (both scientific models and engineering CAD-based models) 
with a common tool set available in AR/VR (e.g., measurement tools and lunar and planetary lighting models) 
and access to NASA data sources. MRET leverages the GSFC developed GMSEC tools to integrate real-
time and recorded engineering (telemetry) data from multiple engineering sources to stimulate visualizations 
as well as provide collaboration within the NASA networks.
Open Source
MLUQ NPO-53190-1
The software provides a systematic machine learning Uncertainty Quantification (UQ) approach based on 
decision theory. Decision Theoretic Bootstrapping provides a rigorous UQ in a cross-validation setting and 
produces Machine Learning algorithms that are more stable with respect to the differences between the 
sample set and the true distribution. The software can show its best performance when there is significant 
epistemic uncertainty.
General Public Release
MoonDiff: A Web Application Enabling Crowdsourced Comparisons  
Between Old and New Lunar Imagery N PO-52599-1
This software harnesses the online community to find changes on the lunar surface, including new impact 
craters and spacecraft hardware. Citizen scientists are presented with pairs of old and new lunar orbital 
imagery in the form of web maps. The interface allows them to mark changes they observe and submit 
those to a database for review by experts, which is also done within the same web application.
General Public Release
MPEC ARC-18885-1
MPEC: Massively Parallel Electron Correlation solves the molecular electronic Schroedinger equation using 
the improved internally contracted Multi-Reference Configuration Interaction method.
Open Source
=====PAGE 129=====
120
Design and Integration Tools
NASA Technology Transfer Program  Software Catalog 2025-26
Multi-Spacecraft Concept and Autonomy Tool (MuSCAT):  
A Low-Fidelity Simulator to Develop and Test Spacecraft Autonomy N PO-52864-1
MuSCAT easily simulates a single-spacecraft or multi-spacecraft mission (to Small Body). It provides a 
modeling framework bridge between the Foundry and Project implementation.  MuSCAT can prove the 
mission needs Autonomous functions or can be carried out from the ground. It facilitates autonomy infusion 
at an architectural level.
General Public Release
NASA Acronyms Browser Extension: Firefox and Chrome K SC-14126
This is a simple browser extension for Firefox and Chrome that defines NASA abbreviations according to the 
NASA acronyms database. Just select any NASA-related acronym and its definition appears below it.
Open Source
NASA Lewis Steady-State Heat Pipe (LERCHP) Code L EW-15625-1
LERCHP predicts the performance of heat pipes in the steady state. It can be used as a design tool on a 
personal computer or, with a suitable calling routine, as a subroutine for a mainframe radiator code. For 
accurate heat pipe modeling, a variety of wick structures are available to the user, including a user wick 
input option. Several working fluids can be chosen as well (including potassium, sodium, and lithium) for 
which the monomer-dimer equilibrium is considered.
U.S. Release Only
NASA STRuctrual ANalysis (NASTRAN) L AR-16804-GS
NASTRAN is a finite element analysis program that was originally developed for NASA in the late 1960s 
under U.S. government funding for the aerospace industry. The software suite provides engineers a 
comprehensive simulation solution for insight into structural behavior. NASTRAN source code is integrated 
into a number of different software packages, which are distributed by a range of companies.
Open Source
NASA.rb (formerly fUnit) GS C-15137-1
NASA.rb (formerly fUnit) is a collection of Fortran modules that provide a framework for automating the 
construction, execution, and reporting of unit tests for Fortran software applications. Support is provided  
for several aspects of unit testing that are peculiar to scientific technical computing including distributing 
jparallel applications and parameterized behavior.
Open Source
NEQAIR: Nonequilibrium Radiative Transport and Spectra Program, Version 15.x A RC-15262-1B
NEQAIR has been NASA’s main radiative heating code for the last 35 years. It is a line-by-line radiation 
code that computes spontaneous emission, absorption and stimulated emission due to transitions between 
various energy states of chemical species along a line-of-sight through a non-uniform gas mixture. This 
allows NEQAIR to calculate the radiative heat flux and detailed spectra at a specified location. The NEQAIR 
v15.0 release has focused on improving stability, solution robustness, usability and providing different 
options for running the code.
U.S. and Foreign Release
NetCDF to GeoJSON Vectors N PO-52575-1
This software converts CF-compliant NetCDF files with vector attributes (u, v, magnitude, direction) to 
GeoJSON.
General Public Release
=====PAGE 130=====
121
Design and Integration Tools
NASA Technology Transfer Program  Software Catalog 2025-26
NetworKing: Space Communications and Navigation (SCaN) App A RC-16778-1
The NetworKing Game is an educational, interactive 3D game in which the player develops a space 
communication network. As he builds his network infrastructure, client spacecraft are attracted to the 
network, generating income and allowing the player to build further. As the player expands his robust 
communication network, fortunate and unfortunate events occur. 
General Public Release
 
NPSS: Electrical Power System Analysis Toolbox L EW-19857-1
This electrical-power system analysis tool can integrate with traditional combustion-based propulsion 
models to analyze the potential benefits of aircraft electrification in the Numerical Propulsion System 
Simulation (NPSS) environment. The toolbox sizes the electrical power system based on required load 
demand at the design point and determines the power available to the loads in off-design.
Open Source
NPSS: Elements, Models, and Interfaces L EW-17051-1A
These engineering elements and sample models were a part of the overall NPSS package before the 2.8 
release. The package contains the default set of engineering elements, sample models, and interfaces with 
other software packages.
U.S. Government Purpose Release
NPSS: Numerical Propulsion System Simulation  L EW-17051-1
NASA Glenn Research Center is developing a common collaborative full engine simulation tool for the U.S. 
Government, aerospace industry, and academia called the Numerical Propulsion System Simulation (NPSS). 
NPSS provides an environment for the analysis and design of propulsion systems for thermodynamic 
systems. The NPSS focuses on the potential integration of multiple disciplines such as aerodynamics,  
structures, and heat transfer, along with the concept of numerical zooming between 0-Dimensional to  
1-, 2-, and 3-dimensional component engine codes. 
U.S. Government Purpose Release
OMINAS: Open-Source Modular Image Navigation and Analysis System N PO-50136-1
The primary motivation for the development of this software was to separate the analysis part of a problem 
from the data-specific part. This allows the exact same software to be used for multiple missions as needed; 
the only requirement for new mission input is the creation of a translator specific to that data source. The 
software provides an API and for developing tools for astronomical data analysis. 
Open Source
Open Scheduling and Planning Interface for Exploration (OpenSPIFe)  A RC-15795-1B
The Open Scheduling and Planning Interface for Exploration (OpenSPIFe) is an integrated planning and 
scheduling toolkit based on hundreds of hours of expert observation, use, and refinement of state-of-the-art 
planning and scheduling technology for several applications within NASA. It was designed from the ground 
up with the needs of the operational user in mind, and it presents unique solutions to a number of problems 
common in other commercial and homegrown systems.
Open Source
=====PAGE 131=====
122
Design and Integration Tools
NASA Technology Transfer Program  Software Catalog 2025-26
Optimal Experimental Design with Fast Neural Network Surrogate Models  L EW-20316-1
Designing optimal experiments minimizes the uncertainty of results and maximizes the efficient use of 
resources. This technology uses machine learning surrogate models and the approximate coordinate 
exchange (ACE) algorithm are used to determine optimal experimental designs (OEDs) over large or 
arbitrarily restrictive design spaces. OED is particularly salient in materials science, where experiments are 
expensive and material properties must often be inferred indirectly. To perform tractable optimization, a 
neural network is trained as a surrogate model to mimic a physics-based simulation, which can calculate 
the expected experimental outcome based on a candidate experimental design and sampled constituent 
properties. The ACE algorithm is used to optimize over large design spaces with many tests and controlled 
parameters where an exhaustive search would be intractable even with the surrogate model. 
Open Source
Orbit Lifetime Monte Carlo (OLMC) L AR-17498-1
Given the dynamic environment in which spacecraft exist, a better methodology for performing orbital 
lifetime analyses over the current practice of point analyses was desired. The approach chosen was to utilize 
Monte Carlo-based predictions; this provides the ability to gauge the probability of meeting mission lifetime 
goals, as well as identifying driving factors. The Monte Carlo analysis, called Orbital Lifetime Monte Carlo 
(OLMC), is based on the NASA Langley Research Center long-term orbit propagator Orbital Lifetime. OLMC 
incorporates the ability to model variations in predictions of solar flux levels and timing of associated peaks, 
the variation in launch vehicle orbit insertion accuracy (altitude, velocity, and flight path angles), spacecraft 
ballistic coefficients, and launch delays. 
U.S. Release Only
Periodic Table of Life (PeTaL) L EW-19879-1
This framework uses artificial intelligence to aid in the systematic inquiry of biology for its application to 
human systems. The backbone of PeTaL integrates an unstructured database with an ontological model 
consisting of function, morphology, environment, state of matter and ecosystem. Tools include text 
classification, thesaurus, data visualization, and analysis. Applications of PeTaL include guiding human 
space exploration, understanding human and geological history, and discovering new or extinct life.
Open Source
PlanetMag GitHub Repository Software for Planetary Magnetic Field Modeling NP O-52921-1
Firstly, planetary magnetic field simulation software is not publicly available for all the planets, and neither 
are all the various models. This unified software package includes all the giant planets in widely used 
languages, making it accessible by anyone in the community. To our knowledge, no other publicly available 
software provides features for inversion of the frequency spectrum of magnetic oscillations experienced 
along an arbitrary trajectory.
General Public Release
PLOT3D Export Tool for Tecplot L AR-17678-1
The PLOT3D Export Tecplot add-on is a runtime library linked into Tecplot at the time of startup of the 
Tecplot software. It enables Tecplot users with the ability to output PLOT3D style files from Tecplot as a 
grid, grid and solution, or grid and function file for use by another computer code. Existing functionality of 
Tecplot only offers input of PLOT3D data and output of image data or Tecplot proprietary formatted data. 
The PLOT3D Exporter add-on thus enables the use of Tecplot as a generation and manipulation of grid and 
solution data for output to flow solvers. In this capacity, Tecplot can be used to interpolate old solutions onto 
new grids imported into Tecplot or created within the Tecplot software. The output of PLOT3D data also 
enables use of Tecplot to convert solutions from other flow solvers into a standard PLOT3D data set. 
General Public Release
=====PAGE 132=====
123
Design and Integration Tools
NASA Technology Transfer Program  Software Catalog 2025-26
Poke: Integrating Ray and Diffraction Models N PO-52667-1
Poke is a package to interface with industry-standard ray-tracing engines to do physical optics calculations 
based on ray data. The development was inspired by the need to add more propagation physics 
modules for Coronagraphs to expand the design space, but Poke has been used to characterize existing 
observatories as well.
General Public Release
Porous Material Analysis Toolbox Based on OpenFoam (PATO)  A RC-16680-1A
The Porous Material Analysis Toolbox (PATO) is a modular analysis platform for multiphase porous reactive 
materials. It can be run as a simple Fourier heat transfer code or include more advanced features as internal 
decomposition (pyrolysis, vaporization), gas-gas and gas-solid chemical interactions (combustion, cracking, 
coking), gas species transport (convection, diffusion), and solid morphology evolutions (internal density 
changes, surface ablation). PATO is implemented as a C++ top-level module of the open-source (GNU GPL) 
computational fluid dynamics software program OpenFOAM. This offering is not approved or endorsed by 
OpenCFD Limited, the producer of the OpenFOAM software and owner of the OPENFOAM and OpenCFD 
trademarks. PATO also uses the open-source (GNU LGPL) thermodynamics, transport, and chemistry 
library Mutation++ produced by the von Karman Institute for Fluid Dynamics.
Open Source
Probabilistic Emulation for Land Surface Model Ensembles N PO-53072-1
This software provides tools for statistical emulation of spatial fields from land surface models (LSMs). The 
tools include pre-processing datasets output from LSM ensemble simulations to facilitate integration with a 
package for fitting the emulator and simulating new realizations of spatial fields using the results.
General Public Release
Program Round-Off Certifier via Static Analysis (PRECiSA) with Kodiak Integration  L AR-19227-1
PRECiSA, which in the current invention disclosure stands for Program Round-off Certifier via Static 
Analysis, is a fully automatic static analyzer for floating-point valued functions. It computes an over-
approximation of the round-off error of a given floating-point expression, along with a formal certificate that 
ensures the correctness of the estimated error. The current invention extends PRECiSA in three ways: it 
enables the use of external tools such as the global optimization tool Kodiak to compute numerical bounds 
in an efficient way; it adds input language support for loops and recursion, and it implements a more 
efficient analysis of nested conditionals.
Open Source
Puppet Module Master G SC-18229-1
This is a Puppet change management module that covers a very wide range of configurations across 
Debian, SLES, and CentOS/RedHat that can be used as a core to automatically build and configure systems 
to a simple YAML specification. 
Open Source
Pyam: Python-implementation of YaM N PO-48447-1
Pyam is a software development framework with tools for facilitating the rapid development of software 
in a concurrent software development environment. Pyam provides solutions for thorny development 
challenges associated with software reuse, managing multiple software configurations, developing 
software product-lines, and multiple platform development and build management. Pyam uses release-
early, release-often development cycles to allow developers to incrementally integrate their changes into 
the system on a continual basis.
General Public Release
=====PAGE 133=====
124
Design and Integration Tools
NASA Technology Transfer Program  Software Catalog 2025-26
PyCycle: A Cycle-Modeling Tool for Design with Gradient Based-Optimization L EW-19288-1
PyCycle is a novel software library written in the Python programming language. It allows a user to perform 
standard engine cycle analysis while also providing analytic derivative (sensitivity) calculations to the end user. 
Open Source
PyDownLinkParser: Multi-mission CCSDS Packet Parser N PO-52886-1
This library parses binary files containing CCSDS packets of various structures (APID) and distributes them 
in pandas dataframes. It is modular and configurable for multiple missions.
General Public Release
QEMU Model for BAE Rad750 (Board Model) G SC-17147-1
This work provides a board model and implementation of the BAE Rad750en PPCI PowerPC to PCI bridge 
chipset for QEMU. 
U.S. Government Purpose Release
Reconfigurable Bandwidth-Efficient Transmit Waveform for High-Rate Telemetry L EW-19307-1
This software has been developed for space communications and is intended for implementation on 
software-defined radio (SDR) technology. The waveform is designed to optimize the data-throughput 
through NASA’s Space Network, in particular, the Ku-band or Ka-band single-access service, which has 
225 MHz of available bandwidth. The waveform is written in very high-speed integrated circuit Hardware 
Description Language (VHDL), appropriate for space-qualified Field Programmable Gate Arrays (FPGAs). 
U.S. Release Only
Savors: A Scalable Aural-Visual Environment for Security Event  
Monitoring, Analysis, and Response A RC-16186-1
Savors is a tool for security event monitoring, analysis, and response. The technology scales to real-world 
environments and uses high-end computing resources on-demand to compile behavior profiles that point  
to anomalous behavior. Auralization allows both monitoring and analysis to be performed in parallel and 
draws attention to critical events in one tool when utilizing another. Remote data access and response  
capabilities across distributed resources are enabled using grid computing that provides a secure, single 
sign-on environment.
Open Source
SCaN Optical Link Assessment Tool, Version 3 L EW-19463-1
This calculation procedure has been designed and implemented in software that enables the specification 
and design of a space-based optical communications system. The resulting optical link budget essentially 
accounts for the communication power flow through the entire optical communications channel from the 
transmitter to the receiver and yields design specifications for the optical system necessary to assure 
reliable data transmission with desired operational metrics such as data rate, link margin, etc. 
U.S. Release Only
SCaN Optical Link Budget Tool L EW-19225-1
A calculational procedure in this software enables the specification and design of a space-based optical 
communications system. The resulting optical link budget essentially accounts for the communication power 
flow through the entire optical communications channel (from the transmitter to the receiver) and yields 
design specifications for the optical system necessary to assure reliable data transmission with desired 
operational metrics. The link budget takes into account all of the sources of deleterious noise that enters into 
the communications, and it has the capability of being interfaced with the orbital element calculations  
of the Satellite Tool Kit (STK) to allow the dynamic description and evolution of optical link operation from 
any space-borne satellite within the solar system to and from the Earth.
U.S. Release Only
=====PAGE 134=====
125
Design and Integration Tools
NASA Technology Transfer Program  Software Catalog 2025-26
Segmented Aperture Wavefront Sensing and Control Software  
for Space-Based Coronagraphs N PO-53015-1
This software package performs Electric Field Conjugation (EFC) and Wavefront Control (WFC) for space-
based, large aperture segmented internal coronagraph observatories. Then it computes contrast ratios for 
detecting exoplanets and other phenomenon orbiting distant stars. It was developed primarily for ATLAST, 
HabEX, and HWO.
General Public Release
Sequence JSON - A JSON Schema for Specifying Spacecraft Command Sequences N PO-52574-1
Provides a JSON Schema that specifies the properties and datatypes to specify a spacecraft command 
sequence in JSON.
General Public Release
Sequential Monte Carlo Sampling with Python (SMCPy)  L AR-19517-1
This software is an implementation of Sequential Monte Carlo (SMC) that uses the Message Passing 
Interface (MPI) to provide users general access to parallel UQ methods in Python 2.7. To operate the code, 
the user supplies a computational model built in Python 2.7, defines prior distributions for each of the model 
parameters to be estimated, and provides data to be used for calibration. SMC sampling can then be 
conducted with ease through instantiation of the SMC class and a call to the sample() method. The output of 
this process is an approximation of the parameter posterior probability distribution conditioned on the data 
provided.
Open Source
SimuPy Flight Vehicle Toolkit  A RC-18618-1
This software library leverages open-source scientific computing tools to implement an efficient simulation 
framework for flight vehicles in Python. Equations of motion are composed in blocks using the SimuPy 
library, an open-source Python alternative to Simulink, and integrated using SciPy’s wrappers for standard 
Fortran implementations of ordinary differential equation solvers. Dynamics equations of the inertial state 
variables for the position, orientation, and their corresponding rates for integration are developed using the 
SymPy symbolic library and implemented using code generation. Kinematics equations are implemented 
through symbolic definition and code generation as well as leveraging other open-source software that 
implements useful functions, such as the solutions to the inverse geodesy problem.
Open Source
Software Architecture Framework for Extensibility  
Using Dynamic Assembly of Reflective Types (SAFE-DART) L EW-19593-1
SAFE-DART is a framework designed to increase the extensibility and flexibility of a software system 
written in C++ and utilizing the Qt C++ framework from The Qt Company. SAFE-DART adds flexibility to the 
software system by making it simple to change computer software components (CSC) by selecting from 
multiple implementations provided by the software system in a way that can be controlled by the user at 
run-time. SAFE-DART also allows the use of modules to provide additional CSC implementations without 
the need to alter the original software system, allowing additional functionality to be added to the system 
even at run-time.
Open Source
Software Defined Networking Implementation of a Delay Tolerant  
Networking Bundle Protocol Version 6 and 7 Translator L EW-20475-1
This software has the Programming Protocol-Independent Packet Processors (P4) logic to translate 
between Bundle Protocol (BP) version 6 and version 7 on an Aurora 710 networking switch containing an 
Intel Tofino integrated circuit (IC) through data plan programming.
Open Source
=====PAGE 135=====
126
Design and Integration Tools
NASA Technology Transfer Program  Software Catalog 2025-26
Software for Controlling a Magnetically Levitated Rotor L EW-17293-2
The ultimate goal in designing FATMaCC (Five-Axis, Three-Magnetic-Bearing Control Code) was to achieve 
full rotor levitation and control at a loop time of 50 s. Using a 1-GHz processor, the code controls a five-axis 
system in either a decentralized or a more elegant centralized (model control) mode at a loop time of 56 s. 
General Public Release
Space Mission Architecture and Risk Analysis Tool (SMART) N PO-49732-1
SMART supports a high-level system trade study on a complex mission, such as a potential Mars Sample 
Return (MSR) mission, in an intuitive and quantitative manner. SMART offers a unique capability of handling 
correlated redundancies and accurately evaluating the probability of mission success, as well as its 
sensitivity to the reliability of mission components. 
Open Source
STARS: Spatial Timeseries for Automated High-Resolution Multi-Sensor Data Fusion N PO-52748-1
Implements a novel, statistical data fusion methodology called STARS (Spatial Timeseries for Automated 
high Resolution multi-Sensor data fusion) to provide daily, high spatial resolution estimates of remotely-
sensed imagery by combining data from multiple spectrometers (e.g. Landsat/Sentinel/MODIS/VIIRS).
General Public Release
Station Spacewalk Game App A RC-16779-1
This video game features simulations of Extravehicular Activities (EVAs) conducted by NASA astronauts on 
missions to the International Space Station.
General Public Release
SysML System Model for the Thirty-Meter Telescope (TMT) N PO-50126-1
SysML is a standard, visual, and general-purpose system modeling language developed by the Object 
Management Group (OMG). MagicDraw from NoMagic is used as a modeling tool.
Open Source
System/Observer/Controller Identification Toolbox (SOCIT) L AR-15241
SOCIT is a collection of functions, written in MATLAB language and expressed in M-files, that implements 
a variety of modern system identification techniques. For an open-loop system, it features functions for 
identification of a system model and corresponding forward and backward observers directly from input 
and output data. For a closed-loop system, SOCIT identifies an open-loop model, an observer, and 
corresponding controller gain directly from input and output data.
U.S. Release Only
TaskForce: A Software Task Design and Execution Framework  M SC-26281-1
The mission of TaskForce is to provide a rapid prototyping framework for a component-based programming 
model. Users of the framework will develop processing elements (called Tasks) in Python. These Tasks 
can then be composed together with other Tasks to form Blocks. Each Block can have not only Tasks, but 
other Blocks as well. Using this composition pattern allows a developer to create a hierarchical application 
structured from these reusable elements. Tasks and Blocks can be connected together and pass Events. In 
this fashion, a series of Tasks could be “chained” together to execute in serial fashion, or even create a more 
complex web of interaction.
Open Source
=====PAGE 136=====
127
Design and Integration Tools
NASA Technology Transfer Program  Software Catalog 2025-26
TetrUSS Computational Fluid Dynamics Software (TetrUSS) L AR-16882-1
The most awarded software in the history of NASA, TetrUSS is a suite of computer programs used for 
fluid dynamics and aerodynamics analysis and design. The software is widely used in other government 
organizations, the aerospace industry, academia, and non-aerospace industries such as automotive, 
bio-medical, and civil engineering.
U.S. Release Only
Thermodynamically Coupled Air-Droplet Icing Wind Tunnel Model (TADICE) L EW-19874-1
This one-dimensional numerical model simulates icing wind tunnels by modeling the thermodynamic 
interactions between the water/ice particles of an icing cloud and the flowing air. The goal of the model is 
to better understand the complex interactions between the known test parameters at the tunnel inlet and 
have greater confidence in the conditions at the test section. The model can simulate supercooled liquid and 
standard water clouds. 
U.S. Release Only
Tools for Map Validation and Verification from DEMs Without Use of Ground Tie Points N PO-53192-1
This software allows for the validation of two digital elevation maps (DEMs) without the use of ground tie 
points or ground-based surveys. It quantifies the agreement between the two maps. Maps created with 
different methods which show high agreement are likely to reflect the true elevation at that location.
General Public Release
Total Verification System and C++ Based Verification Test Bench G SC-16013-1
This technology verifies complex space flight digital designs in a more thorough manner than was previously 
possible while offering cost savings and reduced schedule time. The software combines a custom-designed 
GSE unit, the Total Verification System, along with a powerful test bench environment that uses C++. Together, 
these elements allow a high level of code reuse between all phases of the design and test cycle.
U.S. Government Purpose Release
Transport Class Model (TCM) Aircraft Simulation Software L AR-18322-1
This six-degree-of-freedom, flat-earth dynamics, non-linear, and non-proprietary aircraft simulation  
is a representation of a generic mid-sized twin-jet transport aircraft.
General Public Release
TRAVIST: Tensegrity Rover Analysis and Visualization Toolkit  L AR-20224-1
The Tensegrity Rover Analysis and Visualization Toolkit (TRAVIST) is a software package for the design, 
analysis, and visualization of TANDEM-class tensegrity rovers. The Tension Adjustable Network for 
Deploying Entry Membrane (TANDEM) is a multifunctional rover concept which combines tensegrity robotics 
with deployable heatshield technology to create a comprehensive entry, descent, landing, and locomotion 
(EDL-L) vehicle for planetary exploration.
General Public Release
TREETOPS MFS-33566-1
TREETOPS is a time history simulation of the motion of a complex multi-body flexible structures with active 
control elements. The name TREETOPS refers to the class of structures that may be simulated by the 
program, i.e., those having a tree topology (where loop closures are handled with a cut graph technique). 
TREETOPS offers the user an advanced capability for analyzing the dynamics and control-related issues  
of such structures. 
U.S. Government Purpose Release
=====PAGE 137=====
128
Design and Integration Tools
NASA Technology Transfer Program  Software Catalog 2025-26
Trick Simulation Environment M SC-25665-1
The Trick Simulation environment is a generic simulation toolkit used for constructing and running 
simulations. The Trick Interface Code Generator (ICG), a utility that provides math model class and structure 
layout data, has been rewritten and is based off of the open-source clang/llvm project. The numerical 
integrators have been replaced with a common set of integrators, and several core components have been 
enhanced from previous Trick versions. 
Open Source
Trick Variable Server Input Output (TVS_IO)  M SC-26988-1
Trick Variable Sever Input Output or TVS_IO (sometimes referred to as TVS-IO or TVSIO) is a NASA Core 
Flight System (CFS) to Simulation interface software package which integrates with the CFS System and/
or the Trick Simulation Environment, and allows bidirectional communication as well as translation between 
simulation variables and Flight Software (FSW) messages
Open Source
TrickCAT MSC-26675-1
A Trick-based framework for writing real-time EtherCAT applications using the EC-Master driver from 
Acontis Technologies.
U.S. Government Purpose Release
TrickCFS: Integrated cFS and Trick Simulation Environment M SC-26711-1
TrickCFS is a software package that provides the C structs, C++ classes and pertinent code required to 
synchronize a core Flight System (cFS) mission with the Trick simulation executive. Time is modeled by 
the simulation and the Trick Memory Manager provides a method to peek, poke, and data record cFS 
application data without modifying any FSW code.
U.S. Release Only
TrickHLA: An IEEE 1516 High Level Architecture (HLA) Simulation Interoperability  
Standard Implementation for Trick Base Simulations M SC-26718-1
This software abstracts away the details of using the HLA, allowing the user to concentrate on the 
simulation. The TrickHLA software is data driven and provides a simple application programming interface 
making it relatively easy to take an existing Trick simulation and make it HLA aware (i.e. a distributed 
simulation).
Open Source
Tuning Optimizing Genetic Algorithm (TOGA)  N PO-51929-1
Tuning Optimizing Genetic Algorithm (TOGA) is a lightweight software package for distributed GA 
optimization of black-box models and algorithms. It can be used when rapid optimization of algorithms with 
a large number of parameters is necessary and massively parallel compute is available.
Open Source
Uncertainty Quantification Toolbox (UQTools) L AR-17855-1
UQTools is a MATLAB-based software package designed to efficiently analyze dynamic systems subject 
to parametric uncertainty. UQTools accepts uncertainty models based upon both probabilistic and 
non-probabilistic definitions, and it realizes several complementary methods for performing a variety of 
uncertainty quantification tasks.
U.S. Release Only
=====PAGE 138=====
129
Design and Integration Tools
NASA Technology Transfer Program  Software Catalog 2025-26
USM3D L AR-16670-GS
USM3D is a tetrahedral unstructured flow solver that has become widely used in industry, government, 
and academia for solving aerodynamic problems. Since its first introduction in 1989, USM3D has steadily 
evolved from an inviscid Euler solver into a full viscous Navier-Stokes code. The technology has been a part 
of the NASA TetrUSS system.
U.S. Release Only
VECTOR, Visual Analytics Application for Bundle Adjustment Error Detection N PO-52648-1
VECTOR (Visualization and Editing of Camera Tiepoints, Orientations, and Residuals), introduces a novel 
approach to visualize camera poses before and after bundle adjustment, as well as the resulting 3D point 
cloud (map) allowing researchers and operators to visually inspect and interpret the output of a single 
bundle adjustment optimization.
General Public Release
Vehicle Sketch Pad (VSP) L AR-17491-1
The Vehicle Sketch Pad (VSP) is an aircraft geometry tool for rapid evaluation of advanced design concepts. 
Fast and accurate geometry modeling allows the designer to use more complex analysis methods earlier in 
the design process and reduces reliance on empiricism in conceptual design. VSP includes tools to model 
and export the internal structural layout.
Open Source
Versatile ImpulSive Interplanetary Trajectory OptimizeR (VISITOR) L AR-18538-1
The design of trajectories for interplanetary missions represents one of the most complex and important 
problems to solve during conceptual space mission design. To facilitate conceptual interplanetary mission 
sizing activities, it is essential to obtain sufficiently accurate trajectories in a fast and repeatable manner. To 
this end, the VISITOR software tool was developed. This tool modularly augments a patched conic, multiple 
gravity-assist with one deep space maneuver (MGA-1DSM) trajectory model with a mass model, launch 
window analysis, and the capability to simulate realistic arrival and departure operations. The tool was 
validated against seven flown missions. VISITOR is well-suited for the conceptual design of interplanetary 
trajectories and facilitates future improvements due to its modular structure.
General Public Release
 
Virtual ADAPT A RC-18001-1
Virtual ADAPT is a MATLAB/Simulink simulation of the Advanced Diagnostics and Prognostics Testbed 
(ADAPT) located at NASA Ames Research Center. ADAPT is an electrical power system testbed that 
emulates the power distribution systems on spacecraft. It allows users to inject faults in order to study 
how faults affect the operation of the electrical power system and to evaluate automated diagnostics 
technologies. Virtual ADAPT provides a high-fidelity simulation of this capability. It includes dynamic models 
of all the components of ADAPT and enables all faults that can be injected into the actual testbed to be 
injected into the simulation, including some that would be difficult or unsafe to do in the actual hardware. In 
this way, simulated fault scenarios can be quickly generated under many possible conditions, generating 
simulated data that closely matches what the behavior of the actual testbed would be. This simulated data 
can then be used for diagnostics algorithm development and testing before testing on the actual hardware 
or deploying to a real application.
Open Source
=====PAGE 139=====
130
Design and Integration Tools
NASA Technology Transfer Program  Software Catalog 2025-26
Virtual Environment Computational Training Resource (VECTR) K SC-14010
VECTR is a virtual reality platform, built with commercial off-the-shelf hardware, designed to augment the 
training process for various operations at KSC. VECTR utilizes existing virtual reality hardware and real-time 
game engine software to create digital training environments where engineers and technicians can practice 
working with predefined systems and procedures for current and future operations. VECTR is a flexible, 
scalable platform, and all aspects of the VECTR virtual environment can be changed and updated within the 
software by a developer, even if the hardware hasn’t yet been built in the real world.
General Public Release
Virtual Environment Computational Training Resource (VECTR) V.2  K SC-14415
VECTR2 is an overhaul of the original VECTR software, and it’s use cases go beyond just training in that 
it can be used for design reviews, public outreach, virtual meetings, collaboration and more. VECTR2 is 
a flexible, scalable platform that allows for model updates, if engineering designs change, and scenario 
updates, if a procedure changes. All aspects of the VECTR2 virtual environment can be changed and 
updated within the software by a developer, even if the hardware hasn’t yet been built in the real world. 
VECTR2 gives engineers a suite of tools to use such as measurement, annotation, and model manipulation, 
to interact within the customizable shared VR Spaces. These multi-user environments can be saved and 
later re-visited. Integration with RMIT (Rapid Model Import Tool) allows users to import almost any 3D model 
file type into their virtual environments as well.
U.S. Government Purpose Release
Virtual Environment Computational Training Resource (VECTR): OSIRIS-Rex K SC-14272
VECTR is a virtual reality platform, built with commercial off-the-shelf hardware, designed to augment 
training processes. VECTR is a flexible, scalable platform that allows for model updates if engineering 
designs change, and scenario updates if a procedure changes. This latest version highlights operations in 
the Payload Hazardous Safety Facility (PHSF) of the OSIRIS-REx spacecraft before it gets launched and 
also demonstrates the touchdown on Bennu for sample collection and return.
U.S. Government Purpose Release
Visual Studio Code Extension for PVS  L AR-19642-1
Visual Studio Code Extension for PVS (vscode-pvs) is a plugin extension for Visual Studio Code that 
provides an Integrated Development Environment (IDE) for the Prototype Verification System (PVS).
Open Source
Web-based Space Mission Visualization MF S-34033-1
This software suite consists of demonstration web-apps for orbital trajectories around the Earth and planets 
around the Sun. Files include single page applications implemented in HTML, JavaScript, functional calls to 
3D graphics code libraries including X3Dom and ThreeJS, supporting data files, and some documentation. 
Open Source
Weight Analysis of Turbine Engine: An Object-Oriented Version (WATE++) L EW-19687-1
WATE++ is an object-oriented computer code for gas turbine engine weight estimation; it calculates the 
weight and dimension of each major gas turbine engine component. It is used to create engine architecture 
that could achieve an engine thermodynamic cycle produced by a thermodynamic cycle code. The 
thermodynamic cycle data, the material properties, and design rules for geometric, stress, and turbo-
machinery stage-loading limits were used to determine an acceptable engine flowpath and weight.
U.S. Release Only
=====PAGE 140=====
131131
Electronics  
and Electrical Power
Solar Arrays, Batteries, Cabling, Grounding, Converters, 
Electrical Analysis 
131131
During a six-and-a-half-hour spacewalk to upgrade the International Space Station’s power storage capacity in 2019, 
NASA astronauts Nick Hague (top) and Anne McClain (lower center) are dwarfed by the orbital complex’s solar arrays 
as they work to swap batteries and install adapter plates. Credit: NASA
=====PAGE 141=====
Electronics and Electrical Power
132
NASA Technology Transfer Program  Software Catalog 2025-26
Featured Software
Solenoid Inductance Calculator KS C-12253
The Solenoid Inductance Calculator can be used to compute the inductance approximation of a 
cylindrical solenoid of arbitrary dimensions. The technology’s calculation method (1) uses magnetic vector 
potential to provide a more precise estimate of inductance and (2) is not limited to a specific range of coil 
geometry values.
General Public Release
CCSDS Optical Communications High Photon Efficiency Telemetry  
Signaling Transmit Waveform VHDL/Verilog LE W-20090-1
This technology is a VHDL and Verilog implementation of the Consultative Committee for Space Data 
Systems (CCSDS) Optical Communications High Photon Efficiency Telemetry Signaling waveform. The 
CCSDS 142.0-B-1 Blue Book from August 2019 is implemented. The implementation includes a data source, 
transfer frame synchronization marker attachment, slicer, randomizer, cyclic redundancy check, termination 
bit attachment, convolutional encoder, code interleaver, accumulator, pulse position modulation symbol 
mapper, channel interleaver, codeword sync marker attachment, symbol repeater, slot mapper, and guard 
slot insertion.
U.S. and Foreign Release
Electrical Power System – Sizing and Analysis Tool (EPS-SAT)  LE W-20017-1
The Electrical Power System – Sizing and Analysis Tool (EPS-SAT) is a tool whose purpose is to analyze 
electrical power system architectures in order to better direct investment dollars and to expose the strengths 
and weaknesses of various designs. The software uses on- and off-design modes to complete this analysis. 
In on-design, the electrical power system components are sized (to estimate system mass, loss, and 
efficiency). In off-design, the system’s performance (such as loss, and efficiency) is calculated at points 
in the power system’s operating range. EPS-SAT includes a Newton-Raphson solver, basic and detailed 
electrical power system components, and a library of study tools. By using these elements of EPS-SAT, a 
user can size an electrical power system, perform system trade studies, and examine system response at 
off-nominal design points.
U.S. Government Purpose Release
132
=====PAGE 142=====
Electronics and Electrical Power
133
NASA Technology Transfer Program  Software Catalog 2025-26
Capture Test Waveform for the SCaN Testbed Harris SDR L EW-19286-1
The Capture Test Waveform is a software application designed for space-based reconfigurable radios. 
The innovation allows snapshots of a radio’s receiver environment for any number of objectives, such as 
interference mitigation or radio frequency mapping. Digital samples are acquired and stored in the radio’s 
memory for processing, be that on-board the spacecraft or after download to the ground. The application 
is labeled “test waveform” because it does not perform any standard communication link functions, such 
as carrier recovery or demodulation. Depending on the radio’s resources and architecture, this application 
could be run in parallel with a standard communications link waveform application. 
U.S. Release Only
CCSDS Optical Communications High Photon Efficiency Telemetry  
Signaling Transmit Waveform VHDL/Verilog L EW-20090-1
This technology is a VHDL and Verilog implementation of the Consultative Committee for Space Data 
Systems (CCSDS) Optical Communications High Photon Efficiency Telemetry Signaling waveform. The 
CCSDS 142.0-B-1 Blue Book from August 2019 is implemented. The implementation includes a data source, 
transfer frame synchronization marker attachment, slicer, randomizer, cyclic redundancy check, termination 
bit attachment, convolutional encoder, code interleaver, accumulator, pulse position modulation symbol 
mapper, channel interleaver, codeword sync marker attachment, symbol repeater, slot mapper, and guard 
slot insertion.
U.S. and Foreign Release
CCSDS Optical Communications High Photon Efficiency Transmit  
Downlink Waveform Matlab Model L EW-20511-1
This technology is a Matlab model of the Consultative Committee for Space Data Systems (CCSDS) Optical 
Communications High Photon Efficiency downlink transmit waveform. The model implements the CCSDS 
142.0-B-1 Blue Book from August 2019. This includes a data source, transfer frame synchronization marker 
attachment, slicer, randomizer, cyclic redundancy check, termination bit attachment, convolutional encoder, 
code interleaver, accumulator, pulse position modulation (PPM) symbol mapper, channel interleaver, 
codeword sync marker attachment, symbol repeater, slot mapper, and guard slot insertion. The model can 
be used to verify FPGA implementations of the CCSDS standard.
U.S. and Foreign Release
Electrical Modeling and Thermal Analysis Toolbox (EMTAT) L EW-20097-1
The Electrical Modeling and Thermal Analysis Toolbox (EMTAT) is a MATLAB/Simulink based building block 
graphical tool used to create simulations of electrical/power systems. EMTAT is specifically designed to 
simulate electric/electrified propulsion systems at the level of fidelity (time scale) appropriate to capture the 
interaction with turbomachinery. EMTAT contains blocks that represent electrical components (batteries, 
motors/generators, inverters, etc.) modeled using either power flow or physics based representations. 
EMTAT is compatible with the Toolbox for the Modeling and Analysis of Thermodynamic Systems (T-MATS) 
for simulations that require mechanical components (turbomachinery, shafts, propellers, etc.). For such 
mixed simulations (i.e., those containing both electrical components and turbomachinery), the EMTAT 
blocks can use the T-MATS solver, allowing the relevant electrical and mechanical variables to be solved 
simultaneously.
Open Source
=====PAGE 143=====
Electronics and Electrical Power
134
NASA Technology Transfer Program  Software Catalog 2025-26
Electrical Power System – Sizing and Analysis Tool (EPS-SAT)  L EW-20017-1
The Electrical Power System – Sizing and Analysis Tool (EPS-SAT) is a tool whose purpose is to analyze 
electrical power system architectures in order to better direct investment dollars and to expose the strengths 
and weaknesses of various designs. The software uses on- and off-design modes to complete this analysis. 
In on-design, the electrical power system components are sized (to estimate system mass, loss, and 
efficiency). In off-design, the system’s performance (such as loss, and efficiency) is calculated at points 
in the power system’s operating range. EPS-SAT includes a Newton-Raphson solver, basic and detailed 
electrical power system components, and a library of study tools. By using these elements of EPS-SAT, a 
user can size an electrical power system, perform system trade studies, and examine system response at 
off-nominal design points.
U.S. Government Purpose Release
FPGA Code Development for the iPAS STRS Radio L EW-19389-1
This innovation is FPGA VHDL code written as part of the iPAS STRS radio development. The FPGA design 
receives and processes commands and provides command control and data to the test waveform. It also 
receives and transmits streaming data from/to the embedded processor. 
U.S. Government Purpose Release
NASA Universal Asynchronous Receiver Transmitter (UART)  
Intellectual Property (IP) and VHDL Code  M SC-27118-1
The NASA_UART_Example is an Aldec Active-HDL project that contains the Intellectual Property (IP) files for 
a NASA developed Universal Asynchronous Receiver Transmitter (UART) and supporting files to implement 
an example of using the UART IP.  The source files are a combination of Active-HDL block diagrams, Active-
HDL state machines, and VHDL code.  The block diagram and state machines compile down to VHDL code.  
All the source and compiled VHDL files are provided.
U.S. Release Only
Packet to Electrical Ground Support Equipment (EGSE) Interface Converter, Version 4.0 G SC-16586-1
Developed using platform-independent language, this interface converter packet allows already-existing 
EGSE equipment to be supported on Windows and UNIX operating systems. The software is set up and 
controlled using XML-formatted files that define interface connections and data content.
U.S. Government Purpose Release
Physics-Model-Based Wiring Fault Detection Toolbox for MATLAB A RC-17046-1
Providing a toolbox of functionality for MATLAB, this NASA-developed software detects precursor wiring 
faults (e.g., chafing) in shielded impedance-controlled cabling using measurements from off-the-shelf, time-
domain reflectometry or vector-network analyzer hardware. The technology combines high-fidelity analytical 
physics models for signal propagation with fast Bayesian inference algorithms for intrinsic cable and fault-
parameter retrieval.
Open Source
Real-Time Executive for Multiprocessor Systems (RTEMS)  
RAD750 Board Support Package (BSP)  G SC-17526-1
The innovation is a board support package that provides a port of the open-source Real-Time Executive for 
Multiprocessor Systems (RTEMS) real-time operating system and a full set of hardware drivers for the BAE 
Systems Inc. RAD750 single board computer.
U.S. Government Purpose Release
=====PAGE 144=====
Electronics and Electrical Power
135
NASA Technology Transfer Program  Software Catalog 2025-26
Regvue: Modern Hardware/Software Interface (HSI) Documentation N PO-52420-1
Consolidates multiple Hardware/Software Interface (HSI) documentation sources into a single searchable 
location with automatic encoding/decoding of HSI values that reduces human errors made during hardware 
development and debug.
General Public Release
Solenoid Inductance Calculator K SC-12253
The Solenoid Inductance Calculator can be used to compute the inductance approximation of a cylindrical 
solenoid of arbitrary dimensions. The technology’s calculation method (1) uses magnetic vector potential to 
provide a more precise estimate of inductance and (2) is not limited to a specific range of coil geometry values.
General Public Release
Space Telecommunications Radio System (STRS) Reference Implementation (RI) L EW-19083-1
The STRS Reference Implementation is a demonstration of the STRS architecture. The STRS architecture 
standard for software defined radios is an open architecture for NASA space and ground radios. The 
standard provides a common, consistent framework to develop, qualify, operate, and maintain complex 
reconfigurable and reprogrammable radio systems. The reference implementation allows verification of 
capabilities and provides lessons learned for the improvement of STRS Architecture Standard 1.02. 
U.S. Government Purpose Release
STRS Adaptive Coding and Modulation Waveform for Space Communication L EW-19478-1
An Adaptive Coding and Modulation Waveform for Space Telecommunications Radio System (STRS) has 
been developed and demonstrated on a space-qualified software-defined radio. The waveform utilizes 
the commercial Digital Video Broadcasting-Second Generation standard to provide a suite of modulation 
and encoding schemes, which allows the communication link to be dynamically adjusted to optimize 
performance. The waveform utilizes the Space Data Link Protocol (Consultative Committee for Space 
Data Systems standard) to control the transmitter’s mode of operation, using a BPSK/QPSK receiver. The 
waveform includes the ability to automatically compensate for non-linear channel impairments to improve 
the performance of high-order modulations.
U.S. Release Only
STRS Modular and Portable QPSK Transceiver Waveform for Software-Defined Radios L EW-19723-1
A QPSK transceiver waveform has been developed and implemented on a commercially available ground-
based software-defined radio platform for the Space Telecommunications Radio System (STRS). The 
waveform utilizes legacy NASA forward-error correction codes and Consultative Committee for Space 
Data Systems (CCSDS) data framing standards. It is controlled via a Web interface and allows the user to 
multiplex between test (pseudo-random) and network-sourced data. The product consists of two main 
components: (1) the digital logic (VHDL) implementation for the field-programmable gate array (FPGA) that 
does the required signal processing functionalities and (2) the command-and-control software portion 
that leverages the open-source Core Flight Executive (cFE) software suite and provides a graphical user 
interface to the waveform. 
U.S. Release Only
=====PAGE 145=====
136136
Environmental Science  
Earth • Air • Space • Exoplanet
Terrestrial Environments, Planetary Atmospheric 
Modeling, Radiation Shielding
136 136
NASA and the Japan Aerospace Exploration Agency conduct training missions at Black Point Lava Flow near Flagstaff, 
Arizona, in October 2022. This Desert Research and Technology Studies test was to inform future Artemis missions on 
the Moon that would include a rover like the Space Exploration Vehicle seen here. Credit: NASA
=====PAGE 146=====
Environmental Science  (Earth, Air, Space, Exoplanet)
137
NASA Technology Transfer Program  Software Catalog 2025-26
Featured Software
Orbital Debris Engineering Model (ORDEM), Version 3.1.2 M SC-25457-1
ORDEM offers flux as a function of debris size and year. The technology can be operated in spacecraft 
mode or telescope mode. An upgraded user interface uses project-oriented organization and provides 
graphical representations of numerous output data products.
General Public Release
Earth Global Reference Atmospheric Model 2016 (Earth GRAM 2016) M FS-32780-2
Earth GRAM 2016 is a computer code that can run on a variety of platforms including PCs and UNIX 
stations. The model provides values for atmospheric parameters such as density, temperature, winds, and 
constituents for any month and at any altitude and location within Earth’s atmosphere. Earth GRAM 2010 is 
also currently supported.
General Public Release
Global Reference Atmospheric Model (GRAM) Suite M FS-33888-1
The GRAM Suite is an engineering-oriented atmospheric model that estimates mean values and statistical 
variations of atmospheric properties for planetary destinations. GRAM outputs include atmospheric 
density, temperature, pressure, winds, and chemical composition along a user-defined path. The GRAMs 
have been rearchitected from Fortran to a common object-oriented C++ framework. This new architecture 
creates a common GRAM library of data models and utilities. Version 1.1 of the GRAM Suite contains the 
rearchitected Neptune-GRAM and Titan-GRAM.
General Public Release
137
=====PAGE 147=====
Environmental Science  (Earth, Air, Space, Exoplanet)
138
NASA Technology Transfer Program  Software Catalog 2025-26
Advanced Land Image Assessment System (ALIAS) G SC-15185-1
ALIAS supports radiometric and geometric multispectral image processing for the Advanced Land 
Imager (ALI) instrument onboard NASA’s Earth Observing-1 (EO-1) satellite. The radiometric subsystem 
characterizes and (where possible) corrects: detector operability; gain; bias; coherent, impulse, and 
random noise; signal-to-noise ratios; saturation levels; striping and banding; and the stability of detector 
performance. Geometric processing functions support sensor alignment calibrations; sensor chip assembly 
alignments; modulation transfer function characterizations; image-to-image characterizations; and geodetic 
accuracy assessments. 
Open Source
AGATE Simulation Framework G SC-19420-1
AGATE is a finite-volume scheme framework capable of solving the Hall and CGL (with pressure anisotropy) 
magnetohydrodynamics equations on multiple distributed processors compatible with both CPUs and 
Graphics Processing Units (GPUs). The code itself is written in Python and utilizes several open-source 
libraries to accelerate required calculations. AGATE is being developed as part of the MARBLE project to 
investigate and model the connection between magnetospheric dynamics and the aurora.
Open Source
airPy NPO-52809-1
The airPy package was developed to extract high-resolution satellite data from Google Earth Engine (GEE) 
and calculate Machine Learning-ready features for air pollution studies.  This software prepares raw data 
from GEE into ML-ready NetCDF files. Extra capabilities such as grid-matching is provided. No other 
software offers these features, so airPy was developed in-house to enable future researchers easier access 
to GEE datasets.
General Public Release
Algorithm for Automated Sargassum Detection for Landsat-8 OLI Imagery S SC-00505
This methodology and software were implemented to automatically detect Sargassum spp. (a floating 
aquatic seaweed) in 30-meter LANDSAT-8 Operational Land Imager (OLI) imagery. This Sargassum spp. 
detection is an extended form of Hus approach to derive a floating algae index (FAI), which is defined as the 
difference between the reflectance at the near infrared band (NIR, 859 nm) and the linear baseline between 
the red band (645 nm) and short-wave infrared band (SWIR, 1240 or 1640 nm).
General Public Release
Applied Learning Project M FS-34056-1
The amount of Earth science datasets are increasing at a rapid pace. To manage the large volume of 
Earth science data, data driven approaches are critical technology. This software utilizes machine learning 
approaches to better search, discover, and utilize Earth science data from large archives.
Open Source
AQACF Health Impact Calculator N PO-52578-1
The Air Quality Analytic Collaborative Framework (AQACF) Health Impact Calculator is a set of Python 
scripts and Jupyter notebook for calculating air quality health impacts for major cities from GEOS-Chem 
adjoint sensitivities. It currently supports 14 cities in the US but could be extended.
General Public Release
=====PAGE 148=====
Environmental Science  (Earth, Air, Space, Exoplanet)
139
NASA Technology Transfer Program  Software Catalog 2025-26
ArcGIS toolbox for utility enhancement of OPERA products NP O-52833-1
The OPERA ArcGIS toolbox is software that works with the ArcGIS Desktop Pro software package. The 
toolbox streamlines the user workflow. This toolbox is designed to seamlessly integrate with existing ArcGIS 
Pro software, allowing users to easily access, process, and visualize the OPERA products. The toolbox 
is user-friendly, intuitive, and efficient, providing a range of functionalities to enhance the analysis and 
interpretation of OPERA’s products.
General Public Release
Badhwar-O’Neill 2020 Galactic Cosmic Ray Model (BON2020)  M SC-26835-1
The Badhwar‐O’Neill (BON) model has been used for some time to describe the galactic cosmic ray (GCR) 
environment encountered in deep space by astronauts and sensitive electronics. This package contains the 
BON2020 model. The previous version of the model, BON2014, was calibrated to available measurements to 
reduce model errors for particles and energies of significance to astronaut exposure. Although subsequent 
studies showed the model to be reasonably accurate for such applications, modifications to the sunspot 
number (SSN) classification system and a large number of new high‐precision measurements suggested the 
need to develop an improved and more capable model. The new BON2020 model relies on daily integral flux 
from the Advanced Composition Explorer Cosmic Ray Isotope Spectrometer to describe solar activity.
General Public Release
Breathing Earth System Simulator (BESS) Model Python Implementation N PO-53121-1
This software package is the python implementation of the Breathing Earth System Simulator (BESS) model 
of gross primary production (GPP) and evapotranspiration (ET). This software makes the BESS model 
accessible for remote sensing researchers as part of the evapotranspiration modeling capabilities being 
developed for the ECOSTRESS and SBG missions.
General Public Release
Building Open-Source Hydrodynamic Models Using ANUGA Software N PO-52605-1
This software uses an automated approach to build hydrodynamic models of coastal areas. The software 
is Python  based and downloads and incorporates publicly available data to populate model parameters. 
The software utilizes several common packages as well as an open-source modeling software, ANUGA.  
ANUGA is available on Github and solves the shallow water equations using a finite volume method over an 
unstructured mesh. Our software allows the user to build the input files needed for ANUGA, set up and run 
an ANUGA simulation, and process the output files for visualization and interpretation.
General Public Release
Calculation of the Ocean Contrast from Synthetic Aperture Radar Images N PO-53092-1
In remote sensing of the ocean, contrast in the measured intensity between clean water and other features 
is used to identify different objects on the ocean surface either directly or indirectly via alteration of the 
ocean wave spectrum. The damping ratio, a measure of contrast, is increasingly used for operational oil spill 
monitoring as an aid or alternative to visual inspections by trained personnel, and can in some cases identify 
thicker oil in a slick. This software implements an algorithm that has been proposed for automatically 
calculating the contrast based upon the statistical properties of the measured intensity signals from the 
ocean surface, and shown to work well even for complex slick geometries. It works with multi-frequency and 
medium-to-high resolution data. The algorithm’s flexibility and computational simplicity makes it suitable for 
real-time processing to support oil spill response.
General Public Release
=====PAGE 149=====
Environmental Science  (Earth, Air, Space, Exoplanet)
140
NASA Technology Transfer Program  Software Catalog 2025-26
Carbon-I radiometric model NP O-53246-1
This Python notebook calculates instrument radiometric performance for the Carbon-I mission. It is adapted 
from code developed for similar calculations for the EMIT and SBG-VSWIR instruments. The Carbon-I 
instrument is a Dyson-layout imaging spectrometer that measures spectra in the 2-2.4 micron range. We 
first create top-of-atmosphere radiances for a predefined “”reference scene”” and then assess instrument 
performance in terms of noise sources, signal levels, and total SNR. The code below uses the functions in 
instrument.py for radiometric calculations.
General Public Release
CCMC CAMEL Validation Skill Scores Library G SC-19143-1
CCMC Validation Skill Scores Library is part of the overall CAMEL framework. The library of skill score 
calculation is used for calcuting various types of skill scores with the purpose of comparing observation 
data with model output within the heliophysics community.
Open Source
CEOS Data Cube Platform, Version 2 (CEOS2) L AR-18928-1
The Committee on Earth Observation Satellites (CEOS) has long recognized a need for data processing 
infrastructure to support Earth science objectives in developing countries. Forest preservation initiatives, 
carbon measurement initiatives, water management and agricultural monitoring are just a few examples of 
causes that can benefit greatly from remote sensing data. Currently, however, many developing nations lack 
the in-country expertise and computational infrastructure to utilize remote sensing data. The CEOS Data 
Cube Platform provides a flexible model to address these needs. The platform provides a data ingestion 
framework that includes support for automated ingestion of a wide variety of remote sensing data products. 
The data products are ingested into an N-dimensional data array that abstracts away management of distinct 
acquisitions. The platform has a tiered API for data processing and a data/application platform layer for higher-
level access.
Open Source
Cloud Vertical Structure Reconstruction using Generative Adversarial Networks N PO-51110-1
We demonstrate the feasibility of solving atmospheric remote sensing problems with machine learning using 
conditional generative adversarial networks (CGANs), implemented using convolutional neural networks 
(CNNs). We apply the CGAN to generating two-dimensional cloud vertical structures observed the by 
CloudSat satellite-based radar, using only the collocated Moderate-Resolution Imaging Spectrometer 
(MODIS) measurements as input. The CGAN is usually able to generate accurate guesses of the cloud 
structure, and can infer complex structures such as multilayer clouds from the MODIS data. This network, 
which is formulated probabilistically, also estimates the uncertainty of its own predictions. Furthermore, 
we examine the statistics of the generated data, and analyze the response of the network to each input 
parameter. The success of the CGAN in solving this problem suggests that generative adversarial networks 
are applicable to a wide range of problems in atmospheric science, a field characterized by complex spatial 
structures and observational uncertainties.
Open Source
Coastal Salinity and Temperature (CSalT) Web Application S SC-00492
This Coastal Salinity and Temperature Monitoring (CSalT) Web application’s objective is to provide daily 
access to salinity and temperature data on a continuous and unrestricted basis to authorized users. 
Numerical model data from multiple sources are collected and integrated with NASA remotely sensed 
satellite data to provide up-to-date and historical information on water temperature, salinity, and oyster lease 
locations for coastal environments along the Gulf of Mexico. 
General Public Release
=====PAGE 150=====
Environmental Science  (Earth, Air, Space, Exoplanet)
141
NASA Technology Transfer Program  Software Catalog 2025-26
Code for Comparing Top-Down and Bottom-Up Carbon Budgets N PO-53268-1
This repository contains python codes used to calculate the regional carbon budget within CONUS using 
both top-down and bottom-up methods. Routines exist to synthesize existing bottom-up and top-down 
inventories into regional budgets, and create plots of the resulting dataset.
General Public Release
Common Metadata Repository (CMR) G SC-17610-1
CMR is a spatial and temporal metadata registry that enables the science community to more easily 
discover, use, and exchange NASA’s data and services. The CMR’s main objective is to enable broader use 
of NASA’s Earth-observing systems’ (EOSDIS) data. It allows users to more efficiently and reliably search 
and access data and services and increases the potential for interoperability with new tools and services. 
The CMR stores metadata from a variety of science disciplines and domains, including climate variability 
and change, carbon cycle and ecosystems, Earth surface and interior, atmospheric composition, weather, 
and water and energy cycle. To ensure the quality of the metadata, the CMR system contains a tool called 
the Metadata Management Tool (MMT) which enables metadata providers to develop standards-compliant, 
high-quality metadata. 
Open Source
Crisis Mapping Toolkit (CMT), Version 1 A RC-17472-1
The CMT is a collection of tools for processing geospatial data (images, satellite data, etc.) into cartographic 
products that improve the understanding of large-scale crises such as natural disasters. The cartographic 
products produced by CMT include flood inundation maps, maps of damaged or destroyed structures, 
forest fire maps, and population density estimates. CMT is designed to rapidly process large-scale data 
using Google Earth Engine and other geospatial data systems.
Open Source
DDSA: Data Driven Science Architecture NP O-52413-1
The DDSA software provides for collaborative data science analysis, management, and capture of complex 
bio-science data sets.
General Public Release
DELTA: Deep Earth Learning, Tools, and Analysis A RC-18446-1
A toolkit for applying deep learning to satellite imagery. Scientists label training imagery on a supported 
satellite, and the toolkit learns a deep neural network to address the problem. DELTA makes use of 
pre-trained autoencoders on supported satellites to jump-start training through a learned compressed 
representation of the data source. DELTA will be applied initially to flood mapping, as a component of the 
open-source Crisis Mapping Toolkit.
Open Source
Desktop Exploration of Remote Terrain (DERT) A RC-17647-1
Desktop Exploration of Remote Terrain (DERT) is a software tool for exploring large Digital Terrain Models 
(DTMs) in 3D. It aids in understanding topography and spatial relationships of terrain features, as well as 
performing simple analysis tasks relevant to the planetary science community.
Open Source
Dorado-streamlit  G SC-18815-1
This repository contains observer web tools for the Dorado mission, including an interactive exposure time 
calculator. It is built using Streamlit, a framework for easily turning Python code into interactive data-driven 
web apps.
Open Source
=====PAGE 151=====
Environmental Science  (Earth, Air, Space, Exoplanet)
142
NASA Technology Transfer Program  Software Catalog 2025-26
Earth Global Reference Atmospheric Model 2010 (Earth GRAM 2010) M FS-32780-1
Earth GRAM 2010 is an open-source Fortran computer code that can run on a variety of platforms 
including PCs and UNIX stations. The model provides values for atmospheric parameters such as density, 
temperature, winds, and constituents for any month and at any altitude and location within Earth’s 
atmosphere. Versions from 1999 and 2007 are also available.
General Public Release
Earth Global Reference Atmospheric Model 2016 (Earth GRAM 2016) M FS-32780-2
Earth GRAM 2016 is a computer code that can run on a variety of platforms including PCs and Linux 
stations. The model provides values for atmospheric parameters such as density, temperature, winds, and 
constituents for any month and at any altitude and location within the Earth’s atmosphere. Earth GRAM 2010 
is available in Fortran.
General Public Release
Earth Science Datacasting, Version 2.0 N PO-47725-1
This software gives users control to download only the Earth science data files that are required for 
a particular application. The tool is essentially a simple, yet powerful informed pull and visualization 
mechanism. It is modeled on the server-client architecture used in podcasting and leverages existing NASA 
capabilities. On the server side, the latest data granule is placed in an online store and an XML feed is 
created for the granule. The XML feed is based on the RSS 2.0 and GeoRSS 1.0 standard, with additional 
namespaces for describing Earth science data (dataset- and granule-level descriptions). 
U.S. Government Purpose Release
Earthdata Search Web Application G SC-17399-1
Earthdata Search is a Web application enabling users to quickly and intuitively discover, search, visualize, 
and access Earth Science data in a highly visual manner. It interfaces with and demonstrates current 
state-of-the-art services provided by NASA EOSDIS such as the Common Metadata Repository (CMR) for 
sub-second search results, the Global Imagery Browse Services (GIBS) for fast-tiled imagery visualizations 
of data, and OPeNDAP for data access, transformation, and subsetting.
Open Source
EarthKit NPO-49145-1
EarthKit provides a framework for collaboration among researchers in Earth science. It offers a set of 
software tools for sharing any user’s research environment via the web and managing workflows that run 
in the cloud. By leveraging cloud computing services in this novel way, EarthKit can instantly replicate a 
research computing environment (software, data, operating system, and hardware).
Open Source
EcoPro NPO-52974-1
EcoPro is an analytic collaborative framework to support multidisciplinary teams to conduct ecological 
projection studies, collaborations, applications, and new observation strategy developments. It includes an 
analytic toolkit to perform the multidisciplinary analyses; a data gateway to organize, store, and access the 
key input and output datasets; and a web portal to publish and visualize the results of the studies and to 
provide a virtual collaborative workspace.
General Public Release
=====PAGE 152=====
Environmental Science  (Earth, Air, Space, Exoplanet)
143
NASA Technology Transfer Program  Software Catalog 2025-26
ECOSTRESS Collection 2 Jet Propulsion Laboratory Evapotranspiration (JET) ensemble NP O-53240-1
This software package includes the glue code and algorithms used for producing the gridded and tiled 
ECOSTRESS collection 2 data products. This software package produces gridded (HDF5) and tiled 
(GeoTIFF) outputs for the following data products: L2 LSTE, Land Surface Temperature & Emissivity; 
L2 STARS,  Normalized Difference Vegetation Index (NDVI) & Albedo; L3 JET, Evapotranspiration (ET) & 
Evapotranspiration Auxiliary products (ET_AUX: MET, SM, SEB); and L4 JET, Evaporative Stress Index (ESI) 
& Water Use Efficiency (WUE).
General Public Release
Electric Propulsion Interactions Code (EPIC) M FS-32165-1
EPIC is an interactive computer toolset that enables the construction of a 3D spacecraft model and the 
assessment of a variety of interactions between the model’s subsystems and the plume from an electric 
thruster. EPIC unites different computer tools to address the many complexities associated with spacecraft/
plume interaction processes. 
U.S. Release Only
ElectroStatic Return of Contaminants (ESR) Tool M FS-32011-1
The ESR tool is a first-generation computational code created for the purpose of computing the return 
characteristics of spacecraft-generated contaminants. The code computes the Debye sheath (if necessary), 
the returned contaminant mass rate, returned mass flux, returned mass ratio, return velocity, and surface 
sputter (where applicable). To help the user, default values have been supplied for all program inputs.
U.S. Release Only
Emission of Solar Protons (ESP) Model M FS-31315-1
This model predicts total solar proton fluence levels for interplanetary space in the energy range of 1 to 300 
MeV, which is the range required for both solar cell and electronics applications.
U.S. Release Only
ET Toolbox Product Generation Software NP O-52354-1
The ET Toolbox system produced by the Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL) for the United States Bureau of 
Reclamation (USBR) and Middle Rio Grande Conservancy District (MRGCD), produces daily 30 m estimates 
of evapotranspiration (ET) for the past seven days and future seven days in riparian areas along the Rio 
Grande and Colorado rivers for use in real-time water management.
General Public Release
Exoscene  G SC-18656-1
Exoscene is a Python software library of classes and utility functions for simulating direct images of 
exoplanetary systems. Exoscene can model the orbital position and Lambert sphere phase function of 
an exoplanet based on its user-defined Keplerian orbit and observing date (or series of observing dates). 
It enables a user to visualize the time-dependent, sky-projected position and relative brightness of an 
exoplanet observed in reflected starlight. Exoscene also provides functions for resampling model images to 
different spatial resolutions and for applying statistical noise models to simulate detector exposures. 
Open Source
ExoTR: A fully Bayesian inverse retrieval algorithm  
to interpret exoplanetary transmission spectra N PO-53036-1
A fully Bayesian inverse retrieval algorithm to interpret exoplanetary transmission spectra includes a 
generation of transmission spectra routine and a retrieval routine based on nested sampling (i.e. MultiNest).
General Public Release
=====PAGE 153=====
Environmental Science  (Earth, Air, Space, Exoplanet)
144
NASA Technology Transfer Program  Software Catalog 2025-26
Fortran Argument Parser GS C-18159-1
A software package to simplify handling of command line arguments from within Fortran programs. The 
design is largely based upon a similar package in Python called argParser. These tools allow developers to 
specify expected command line arguments and associate each argument with a specific behavior, and the 
package is extensible allowing developers to define new behaviors for their options.
Open Source
Fortran Template Library (gFTL)  G SC-17742-1
This innovation creates the capability for Fortran software developers to routinely declare and use 
specialized software containers for arbitrary types of data. The capability is somewhat analogous to that 
of the C++ Standard Template Library but with important differences. Although the number of containers 
are expected to grow, the current  supported cases are Vector, Map, and Set. Contained items can be of 
any intrinsic type or user-defined derived type. The user can also indicate that the contained objects are 
polymorphic and/or pointers with corresponding implications for the semantics of using those containers.
Open Source
General Coordinates Network G SC-19205-1
The General Coordinates Network (GCN) is a public collaboration platform run by NASA for the astronomy 
research community to share alerts and rapid communications about high-energy, multimessenger, and 
transient phenomena. GCN distributes alerts between space- and ground-based observatories, physics 
experiments, and thousands of astronomers around the world.
Open Source
General EQFlux G SC-14791-1
The Windows EQFlux computer program converts solar-cell damage resulting from hard-particle radiation 
into the equivalent fluence on MeV electrons. 
Open Source
GeoCam, Version 2 A RC-16088-1A
GeoCam is a geospatial system for disaster response that consists of (1) low-cost consumer hardware (i.e., 
a digital camera or cellphone, position/orientation sensors, and an optional embedded controller) and (2) 
a Web-based workflow that enables images and other geo-referenced data to be shared and viewed in a 
variety of ways. GeoCam includes software that computes image location and provides for geo-rectification, 
KML-formatted geospatial data generation, image management, and geo-referenced data sharing.
Open Source
GeoRef, Version 1 A RC-17943-1
A Web-based software application designed to increase the efficiency and precision in geo-locating 
photographs taken by astronauts from the International Space Station. GeoRef provides highly automated 
processes for calculating the latitude and longitude coordinates of the center point of the image and 
producing geo-referenced map overlays for the image. The georeferenced images produced by GeoRef are 
designed to support the needs of educational, Earth science, and disaster response users.
Open Source
Gigatraj: An Atmospheric Trajectory Model G SC-19110-1
Gigatraj is software that implements an atmospheric trajectory model. Gigatraj is intended for use by 
atmospheric scientists studying the upper troposphere and lower stratosphere. It is written in C++, with a 
set of classes that allow for users to select data sources, interpolation methods, integration methods, etc. It 
can be run in serial mode on a single processor, or it can be run in a multiprocessing environment.
Open Source
=====PAGE 154=====
Environmental Science  (Earth, Air, Space, Exoplanet)
145
NASA Technology Transfer Program  Software Catalog 2025-26
Global Precipitation Space and Ground Radar Comparison Software G SC-15469-1
Designed to support a prototype validation network for the Global Precipitation Measurement (GPM) 
spaceflight mission, this space and ground radar comparison software collects data from the Precipitation 
Radar instrument flying on the Tropical Rainfall Measuring Mission (TRMM) spacecraft. 
Open Source
 
Global Reference Atmospheric Model (GRAM) Suite M FS-33888-1
The GRAM Suite is an engineering-oriented atmospheric model that estimates mean values and statistical 
variations of atmospheric properties for planetary destinations. GRAM outputs include atmospheric 
density, temperature, pressure, winds, and chemical composition along a user-defined path. The GRAMs 
have been rearchitected from Fortran to a common object-oriented C++ framework. This new architecture 
creates a common GRAM library of data models and utilities. Version 1.1 of the GRAM Suite contains the 
rearchitected Neptune-GRAM and Titan-GRAM.
General Public Release
GLOBE Program’s Citizen Science Cloud App for iOS G SC-17391-1
The Global Learning and Observations to Benefit the Environment (GLOBE) program is a worldwide 
hands-on, primary and secondary school-based science and education program. GLOBE members 
currently enter their scientific data using a data entry tool on GLOBE’s site. This app allows GLOBE and 
non-GLOBE members and GLOBE to enter cloud observations into their mobile devices and send their 
observations to the GLOBE database. Users may enter the data while the mobile device is not connected to 
the Internet, data will be sent to GLOBE on user command when the device is back online.
General Public Release
GLOBE Program’s Data Entry App for Android G SC-17390-1
The Global Learning and Observations to Benefit the Environment (GLOBE) program is a worldwide 
hands-on, primary and secondary school-based science and education program. The GLOBE Program’s 
Data Entry App for Android enables members to enter data to via their Android devices and while in the field 
(where they may not have Internet connection). Their data will be stored locally on their Android devices and 
sent to the GLOBE database once their devices get connected to Internet. This project also facilitates data 
entry by leveraging mobile capabilities including GPS, photography, and date/time.
General Public Release
GLOBE Program’s Data Entry App for iOS G SC-17389-1
The Global Learning and Observations to Benefit the Environment (GLOBE) program is a worldwide 
hands-on, primary and secondary school-based science and education program. The GLOBE Program’s 
Data Entry App for iOS enables members to enter data via their iOS devices and while in the field (where 
they may not have Internet connection). Their data will be stored locally on their iOS devices and sent to the 
GLOBE database once their devices get connected to Internet. This project also facilitates data entry by 
leveraging mobile capabilities including GPS, photography, and date/time. 
General Public Release
Hazards and Population Mapper (HazPop) Mobile Application for iOS Platform G SC-17605-1
HazPop is a free app developed by the NASA Socioeconomic Data and Applications Center (SEDAC). It 
enables users to easily display recent natural hazard data in relationship to population, major infrastructure, 
and satellite imagery. Hazards data include the location of active fires over the past 48 hours; earthquake 
alerts over the past seven days; and yesterday’s air pollution data measured from space. The app shows the 
location of major dams and nuclear power plants and provides more detailed information and imagery for 
these facilities where available. By drawing a circle around a point or area of interest on the map, users can 
obtain an estimate of the total population and land area enclosed within.
General Public Release
=====PAGE 155=====
Environmental Science  (Earth, Air, Space, Exoplanet)
146
NASA Technology Transfer Program  Software Catalog 2025-26
HDFView Plugin G SC-14948-1
This Java-language software plug-in to HDFView provides an interface for two versions of hierarchical data 
formats (HDF 4 and HDF 5). 
Open Source
ICESat-2 Standard Data Products Subsetter G SC-17780-1
This software was designed to subset ICESat-2 Standard Data Products. It reads in a single HDF5 ICESat-2 
data granule, uses rules in a control file to reduce the set of parameters according to the rules in the control 
file, and writes out the resulting file. 
Open Source
Information System for Agricultural Yield Modeling N PO-53108-1
This software is designed to estimate crop yields in agricultural regions using Ukraine as a high-impact test 
case. It is meant to generate yield estimates in a more efficient, accurate, and scalable operation. It aims 
to streamline an existing data processing pipeline called VERCYE in partnership with NASA Harvest, which 
currently relies on manual efforts, and turn it into an automated system that integrates various data source. 
The primary accomplishments include an operationalized crop yield software that’s capable of delivering 
multiple yield estimates for each of Ukraine’s 25 Oblasts during the grow season. Additionally, it prototypes 
an ML model capable of estimating crop yield from SAR data (a sensing technique which can penetrate 
cloud cover). The software will enable fast/more yield estimates to aid decisions in food security and 
agricultural planning.
General Public Release
InSAR Scientific Computing Environment N PO-47557-1
This software uses the next generation of geodetic imaging processing technology for InSAR sensors, 
which is needed to provide flexibility and extensibility in reducing measurements from radar satellites and 
aircraft to new geophysical products. 
U.S. Government Purpose Release
Interactive Spacecraft Charging Handbook with Integrated, Updated Spacecraft  
Charging Models (ISCCH), Version 3.1 M FS-31675-1
The ISCCH is an interactive, Web-based multimedia product that offers updated and integrated spacecraft 
charging models. The software guides the non-expert using the power of sophisticated analysis tools.
U.S. Release Only
Kepler Community Data Analysis Tools A RC-16805-1
The Kepler archive contains time-series data calibrated and reduced from detector pixels. The pipelined 
reduction includes the removal of time-series trends systematic to a spacecraft and its environment.
Open Source
Kernel Flows Emulator N PO-52468-1
Kernel flows defines and utilizes a statistical model that predicts radiative transfer model output. Gaussian 
Process Regression (GPR) is a state-of-the-art emulation technology that models relationships between 
inputs and outputs of a function as realizations of a multivariate Gaussian distribution.
General Public Release
Landslide Hazard Assessment for Situational Awareness (LHASA)  G SC-17452-1
This framework integrates a regional landslide susceptibility map and satellite-based rainfall estimates into 
a binary decision tree model, considering both daily and antecedent rainfall. Using a regionally distributed, 
percentile-based threshold approach, the model outputs a pixel-by-pixel nowcast in near real time at a 
resolution of 30 arcseconds to identify areas of moderate and high landslide hazard. 
Open Source
=====PAGE 156=====
Environmental Science  (Earth, Air, Space, Exoplanet)
147
NASA Technology Transfer Program  Software Catalog 2025-26
Landslide Hazard Assessment for Situational Awareness (LHASA) Version 2.0  G SC-18595-1
In order to advance LHASA’s capabilities to characterize landslide hazards and impacts dynamically, we 
have implemented a new approach that leverages machine learning, new parameters, and new inventories. 
LHASA 2.0 uses the XGBoost machine learning model to bring in dynamic variables as well as additional 
static variables to better represent landslide hazard globally. Global rainfall forecasts are also being 
evaluated to provide a 1-3 day forecast of potential landslide activity. Additional factors such as recent 
seismicity and burned areas are also being considered to represent the preconditioning or changing 
interactions with subsequent rainfall over affected areas.
Open Source
Large Scale Data Transfer Study M FS-34433-1
To facilitate petabyte scale data transfer between NASA and ESA, we have developed a framework for 
transferring 6 petabytes of data from ESA to NASA to support the Harmonized Landsat Sentinel-2 data 
products. With increases in collaboration between the agencies and increased data volumes, this framework 
is designed such that it can be applied for future data exchanges between the agencies.
Open Source
Lightning Forecasting Algorithm (LFA) M FS-33225-1
LFA is an algorithm that may be implemented within any cloud-allowing or cloud-resolving numerical forecast 
model that converts gridded forecasts of updraft speeds and graupel hydrometeor mixing ratios in the mixed 
phase layer into gridded estimates of total lightning flash rate density.
General Public Release
Low-Altitude Trapped Radiation Model, Version 1 MF S-31309-1
Accurate models of the Earth’s trapped energetic proton environment are required for both piloted and 
robotic space missions. As astronomical and remote sensing detectors become more sensitive, proton 
flux can induce unwanted backgrounds in the instrumentation. The Low-Altitude Trapped Radiation 
Model, based on nearly 20 years of data from the TIRO/NOAA weather satellites, predicts the integral 
omnidirectional proton flux in three energy ranges. The model contains a true solar cycle variation and 
accounts for the secular variation in the Earth’s magnetic field. 
U.S. Release Only
Machine Learning Approach to Derive Diurnal Cycles of XCO2 N PO-53097-1
Train a machine learning model to predict a full diurnal cycle of XCO2 and daily drawdown from 
measurements at 2 to 3 times of day
General Public Release
Magnetogram Forecast (Mag4) 2018  M FS-32802-1
Forecasting from a magnetogram of a sunspot active region, this algorithm predicts solar eruptions 
anticipated within the next 24 to 48 hours. The technology essentially transforms available solar scientific 
data into forecasting tools for severe space weather conditions.
General Public Release
Manufactured Ecosystems Virtual Reality (VR) Mars Habitat Visualization L EW-20760-1
The Manufactured Ecosystems virtual reality (VR) visualization depicts a Mars habitat based on research 
from the Manufactured Ecosystems project. This project researches how ecosystem services provided to 
us on Earth could be replaced or supported by technology and what is needed to achieve this technology. 
This type of research is valuable to helping us live on and explore other planets and could also be applied to 
Earth if something prevented the ecosystem from completing these services.
U.S. and Foreign Release
=====PAGE 157=====
Environmental Science  (Earth, Air, Space, Exoplanet)
148
NASA Technology Transfer Program  Software Catalog 2025-26
Mars Global Reference Atmospheric Model 2010 (Mars GRAM 2010) M FS-33158-1
Mars GRAM is an engineering-level atmospheric model widely used for diverse mission applications, 
including systems design, performance analysis, and operations planning for aerobraking; entry, descent, 
and landing; and aerocapture.
General Public Release
Marshall MRMS Mosaic Python Toolkit (MMM-Py) MF S-33236-1
MMM-Py reads, analyzes, and displays three-dimensional national mosaicked reflectivity data produced 
by NOAA’s National Severe Storms Laboratory (NSSL). MMM-Py can read MRMS mosaics from either their 
unique binary format or their converted NetCDF format; it can also read and properly interpret the current 
mosaic design (4 regional tiles), as well as mosaics produced prior to late July 2013 (8 tiles). The technology 
can easily stitch multiple tiles together to provide a larger regional or national picture of precipitating weather 
systems. Composites, horizontal/vertical cross-sections, and combinations thereof are easily displayed 
using as little as one line of code.
Open Source
MATLAB-Based Solar System Ephemeris Toolbox K SC-12544
This set of MATLAB functions has been used to generate state data (position and velocity) for the Sun, the 
Earth’s moon, and all of the other planets in the solar system. Provided by the Jet Propulsion Laboratory’s 
Solar System Dynamics Group, the technology uses Chebychev polynomial fits of numerical integration 
results for solar system motion. Essentially, the toolbox functions as the MATLAB equivalent of JPL Fortran 
routines used to construct binary ephemeris files, verify correct installation, and generate state data.
General Public Release
Mekong River Total Suspended Sediment Software Applications (Mekong_TSS)  S SC-00507
The Mekong River Total Suspended Sediment Software Application (TSS_Mekong) computes the total 
suspended sediment (TSS) concentrations of the Mekong River from data of the Operational Land Imager 
(OLI), flying on board of the LANDSAT-8.  In this application, computation of TSS follows a two-step process 
which includes; 1) generating the remote sensing reflectance and/or surface reflectance products using 
SeaDAS, a NASA comprehensive image analysis package for the processing, display, analysis, and quality 
control of ocean color data, and 2) running the programgen_tss on the SeaDAS output files to generate 
the total suspended sediment (TSS) images.  The TSS_Mekong was developed with in-situ measurements 
of the Mekong River waters, acquired by NASA, the Naval Research Laboratory (NRL) and Khon Kaen 
University of Thailand personnel during March 2016.
General Public Release
Meteoroid Engineering Model (MEM), Version 3 M FS-32205-2
MEM 3 is NASA’s most current and accurate model of the meteoroid environment. It describes potentially 
hazardous meteoroids in the inner solar system and provides the flux, directionality, speed, and bulk density 
of meteoroids encountered along a user-specified spacecraft trajectory.
General Public Release
MODIS Global Evapotranspiration Project (MOD16) Algorithm N PO-53244-1
This software was designed to produce instantaneous evapotranspiration with the MOD16 model and 
partition latent heat flux into canopy transpiration, interception, and soil evaporation. The MOD16 algorithm 
has been re-implemented to run on instantaneous high spatial resolution remote sensing imagery instead of 
8-day MODIS imagery, making the model more accessible for remote sensing researchers.
General Public Release
=====PAGE 158=====
Environmental Science  (Earth, Air, Space, Exoplanet)
149
NASA Technology Transfer Program  Software Catalog 2025-26
Multi-Sensor Simultaneous Localization and Mapping (SLAM)  
with principled ICP covariance modelling N PO-52659-1
This SLAM solution called State Estimation through Robust Perception in Extreme and Novel Terrains or 
SERPENT estimates robot trajectory and maintains a map database, from which dense global or local 
maps can be obtained on demand for downstream planning algorithms. The design of this system adopts 
the approach that incorporating measurements from many sensor modalities (laser scans, images, IMU, 
altimeter, etc.) into a joint optimization, with the contribution of each carefully modeled through their 
uncertainties, is essential to robust state estimation in challenging, perceptually degraded environments.
General Public Release
Multiple-Doppler Radar Analysis Toolkit (MultiDop)  MF S-33436-1
MultiDop merges three-dimensional variational analysis (3DVAR) software code developed by the University 
of Oklahoma with the Department of Energy’s Python Atmospheric Radiation Measurement Radar Toolkit 
(Py-ART) software framework. This enables end users to ingest, correct, and grid their weather radar data 
using Py-ART, and then pass the radar volumes to MultiDop to synthesize, analyze, and display the 3D 
winds. By using the software developed in this effort, an entire science analysis project can be done using  
a shareable Jupyter notebook.
Open Source
NASA Ames Legacy Mars Global Climate Model A RC-18547-1
This model uses a modified version of the ARIES/GEOS dynamical core coupled with a set of Mars 
physics packages to simulate the martian climate. The physics packages include the treatment of surface 
properties, a ground temperature model, a planetary boundary layer scheme, water and carbon dioxide 
sublimation/condensation physics, a water ice cloud microphysical scheme, the use of a moment method 
for tracer transport, a semi-interactive dust tracking scheme, and a two-stream radiative transfer code 
based on correlated-k’s.
Open Source
NASA Ames Mars Global Climate Model A RC-18710-1
The NASA Ames Mars Global Climate Model (NASA Ames MGCM) physics submodule is intended to 
work with the Finite-Volume dynamical core and cubed-sphere grid (FV3) developed by NOAA/GFDL and 
includes several of the Mars physics packages employed by the NASA Ames Legacy Mars Global Climate 
Model to simulate the Martian climate. The physics packages include: model surface properties such as 
thermal inertia and albedo; a ground and subsurface temperature scheme; a planetary boundary layer (PBL) 
scheme; water and carbon dioxide sublimation/condensation physics; a 2-moment dust and water-ice 
cloud microphysical scheme; several methods for the treatment of dust including an analytically prescribed 
dust field, dust lifting matched to a prescribed map, and fully-interactive lifting; and a two-stream radiative 
transfer code based on correlated-Ks.
Open Source
NASA Forecast Model Web (NFMW) Map Service G SC-15276-1
NFMW reads weather forecast models outputs; subsets the data to the region of interest; interpolates the 
data to the specified size; generates a visualization of the data using colors, contour lines, or arrows; and 
sends the visualization to the client. 
Open Source
=====PAGE 159=====
Environmental Science  (Earth, Air, Space, Exoplanet)
150
NASA Technology Transfer Program  Software Catalog 2025-26
NASA NeMO-Net, the Neural Multi-Modal Observation and Training Network A RC-18500-1
A convolutional neural network (CNN) designed for marine ecosystem classification. The CNN takes as input 
2D satellite and drone images as well as 3D reconstructions of underwater environments and generates 
classification maps for those environments as output. These classification maps can be used to better 
understand and protect coral reefs globally. One component of NeMO-Net is a citizen science game for 
mobile devices and personal computers. Through playing this game, players help NASA classify coral reefs 
and other aquatic ecosystems by painting on 2D and 3D images of coral. The application educates players 
on how to identify the different types of coral and player classifications are used to train the CNN to classify 
aquatic ecosystems autonomously.
General Public Release
NASA Visualization Explorer (NASA Viz) for Android G SC-17628-1
NASA Viz is an intuitive interactive Android application and an extension of the NASA Viz iPad and iPhone 
versions. The application delivers science stories with multimedia content linking high-quality explorable 
images, descriptive text, visualizations, videos and interviews with a fresh look and feel. App features 
include: credit information for each story, the ability to share stories with social media and to create lists of 
stories that can be shared with other users, and the ability to explore stories by keywords and search. 
General Public Release
NASA/Air Force Spacecraft Charging Analyzer Program (NASCAP-2K), Version 4.5 M FS-32056-1
NASCAP-2K is the next-generation spacecraft charging analysis code. The technology is a comprehensive 
update to the original NASCAP spacecraft charging codes written twenty years ago. A collaboration of 
NASA and the U.S. Air Force Research Lab (AFRL), the software builds upon the Air Force’s DynaPAC 
charging algorithms and will replace 3D spacecraft charging codes for all environments. 
U.S. Release Only
Neo-Geography Toolkit (NGT), Version 2 A RC-16341-1A
NGT is a collection of automated processing tools that can transform raw geospatial raster data from 
remote sensing instruments into useful cartographic products, including visible image base maps and 
topographic models. 
Open Source
Neptune Global Reference Atmospheric Model (Neptune-GRAM), Version 1.0 M FS-32296-1
From surface to orbital altitudes, this Fortran-based program provides engineering estimates of density, 
temperature, pressure, and winds for the Neptune atmosphere.
General Public Release
Obs4MIPS GSC-16848-1
This technology is a front end to the Climate Model Output Rewriter (CMOR2) software package. The 
technology converts a variety of standard data formats (e.g., netcdf3, netcdf4, Grads control files, and 
MATLAB data files) to allow publication on the Earth System Grid Federation (ESGF) data node.
Open Source
OCO-3 Snapshot Area Map Global Level 3 Zarr Product Generation N PO-52858-1
NASA-JPL ’s OCO-3 is an instrument onboard the International Space Station that measures carbon dioxide 
in the Earth’s atmosphere. OCO-3 is similar in design to its predecessor, OCO-2, with the addition of the 
Pointing Mirror Assembly (PMA) which essentially allows the instrument to focus its observations on the area 
surrounding a given location of interest on a single overflight. This is called a Snapshot Area Map, or SAM, 
and is the focus of this software. This software takes daily OCO-3 CO2 input, isolates SAM captures, and 
fits the data to a global, fixed grid for a level 3 output product.
General Public Release
=====PAGE 160=====
Environmental Science  (Earth, Air, Space, Exoplanet)
151
NASA Technology Transfer Program  Software Catalog 2025-26
Orbital Debris Engineering Model (ORDEM), Version 3 M SC-25457-1
ORDEM offers flux as a function of debris size and year. The technology can be operated in spacecraft 
mode or telescope mode. An upgraded user interface uses project-oriented organization and provides 
graphical representations of numerous output data products.
General Public Release
Parallel Fortran Logger (pFlogger) G SC-18012-1
A software logging facility that is tailored to the needs of parallel Fortran software. The facility greatly 
simplifies the process of logging routine messages within a scientific simulation across multiple processes 
in a manner that is configurable at run time. Messages can be annotated with different severity levels such 
that low-level diagnostic information can be generally suppressed except when desired.
Open Source
 
Particle Trajectory with Shepard’s Interpolation for Raindrops K SC-13800
A particle trajectory model, Particle Trajectory with Qshep interpolation (PTQ), was previously developed to 
describe the path of rocket plume ejected particles on the lunar surface, predicting the distance particles 
travel and their impact velocities. A modification of PTQ was made to support the study of the disdrometer-
derived Z-R relation. The new version, Particle Trajectory with Shepards interpolation for Raindrops (PTS-R), 
incorporates an empirical relation between particle diameter D and the drag shape factor Sf to account for the 
fact that raindrops, unlike lunar soil particles, change shape in response to aerodynamic forces. A relationship 
was empirically determined relating Sf to particle diameter D for raindrops. The software also supports the 
original plume driven dust/soil particle application.
General Public Release
Phenological Parameters Estimation Tool (PPET)  S SC-00321
A set of algorithms implemented in MATLAB that estimates key vegetative phenological parameters. For a 
given year, the PPET software package takes in temporally processed vegetation index data (3-D spatio-
temporal arrays) generated by the Time Series Product Tool (TSPT) and outputs spatial grids (2-D arrays) 
of vegetation phenological parameters. As a precursor to PPET, the TSPT uses quality information for each 
pixel of each date to remove bad or suspect data, and then interpolates and digitally filters the time series 
to produce a continuous, smoothed vegetation index product in which data voids are eliminated. Both the 
TSPT and PPET use Moderate Resolution Imaging Spectroradiometer (MODIS) satellite multi-spectral data 
as a default, but each software package is easily modifiable and could be used with any high-temporal-rate 
remote sensing system that is capable of producing vegetation indices. MATLAB, MATLAB Runtime Library 
and ERDAS IMAGINE are required to run the software.
U.S. Government Purpose Release
Planetprofile, Software Framework for Constructing  
Interior Structure Models Based on Planetary Properties NP O-53317-1
Software framework for constructing 1D interior structure models based on planetary properties. Self-
consistent thermodynamics are used for fluid, rock, and mineral phases. Sound speeds, attenuation, and 
electrical conductivities are computed as outputs. The main code is called from an input file containing all 
the planetary data.
General Public Release
Planetthrak, Software for Modeling Thermal Fracturing in Ocean Worlds N PO-53328-1
Computing the depths of potential thermal fracturing in different planetary bodies based on simple two-layer 
models of their interiors. This information is important for understanding the depths of possible water-rock 
interactions that might provide energy for life, and also for understanding the physical properties of the 
upper rocky crusts that might be probed by geophysical measurements.
General Public Release
=====PAGE 161=====
Environmental Science  (Earth, Air, Space, Exoplanet)
152
NASA Technology Transfer Program  Software Catalog 2025-26
Plant Trait Estimation from Radiance for Fire Risk Estimation N PO-53216-1
Existing plant traits estimation techniques rely on empirical models so they are sensitive to training data. 
Here we use a physical model that estimates reflectance, and we use that reflectance within a radiance 
model to invert radiance measurements directly to plant traits.
General Public Release
Priestley-Taylor Jet Propulsion Laboratory Evapotranspiration Model Python Package N PO-53040-1
This software package is a Python implementation of the Priestley-Taylor Jet Propulsion Laboratory (PT-JPL) 
model of evapotranspiration. The PT-JPL model was designed for processing remote sensing data. It has 
the ability to partition latent heat flux into canopy transpiration, interception, and soil evaporation.
General Public Release
Priestley-Taylor Jet Propulsion Laboratory Soil Mositure (PT-JPL-SM)  
Evapotranspiration Model Python Implementation NP O-53113-1
This software package is a Python implementation of the Priestley-Taylor Jet Propulsion Laboratory Soil 
Moisture (PT-JP-SM) model of evapotranspiration.  The PT-JPL model was designed for processing remote 
sensing data. It has the ability to partition latent heat flux into canopy transpiration, interception, and soil 
evaporation.
General Public Release
Python Advanced Microwave Precipitation Radiometer Data Toolkit (PyAMPR) MF S-33219-1
This toolkit reads geolocated brightness temperature data (in ASCII format) from any flight of the AMPR 
airborne instrument. A python script pulls out timing, brightness temperatures, and other information from 
each channel/geolocation and store them as attributes using the appropriate type of array. The approach 
consists of ingesting the entire file as a text string and then parsing and converting as necessary. The file is 
read and the data are populated when the class is instantiated with the full path and name of an AMPR file. 
Numerous visualization methods are provided, including track plots, strip charts, and Google Earth KMZs. In 
addition, polarization deconvolution is available.
Open Source
Python Interface to Cyclone Global Navigation Satellite System  
(CYGNSS) Wind Dataset M FS-33273-1
CYGNSS is a NASA Earth science mission that launched in December 2016. This software, which is  
written in the Python language, was developed to facilitate the ingest, analysis, and display of CYGNSS data.
Open Source
Python Interface to Dual-Pol Radar Algorithms (DualPol) M FS-33274-1
This is an object-oriented Python module that facilitates precipitation retrievals (e.g., hydrometeor type, 
precipitation rate, precipitation mass, particle size distribution information) from polarimetric radar data. It 
leverages existing open-source radar software packages to perform all-in-one retrievals that are then easily 
visualized or saved using existing software.
Open Source
Python Polarimetric Radar Beam Blockage Calculation (PyBlock) M FS-33284-1
This Python package calculates beam blockage in polarimetric weather radar data using the specific 
differential phase (KDP) and fully self-consistent (FSC) methods of Timothy J. Lang et al. (2009; J. Atmos. 
Oceanic Technol.). This information can be used to correct the radar data when the radar beams intersect 
objects like trees, buildings, and mountains.
Open Source
=====PAGE 162=====
Environmental Science  (Earth, Air, Space, Exoplanet)
153
NASA Technology Transfer Program  Software Catalog 2025-26
Python Turbulence Detection Algorithm (PyTDA) MF S-33237-1
PyTDA, an MSFC-based implementation of the National Center for Atmospheric Research (NCAR) 
Turbulence Detection Algorithm (NTDA), can be used for convective-scale analysis, situational awareness, 
and forensic meteorology. The software provides Python functions that will estimate turbulence from 
Doppler radar data. It is written in the Python programming language.
Open Source
Radbelt: Astropy-friendly Wrapper for the AE-8/AP-8 Van Allen Belt Model  G SC-18816-1
This is a small Python library to model the fluxes of charged particles trapped in the Van Allen belt. It 
provides a fast, simple, and convenient Python interface to the International Geomagnetic Reference Field 
(IGRF) model and NASA’s AE-8/AP-8 models of electron and proton fluxes, which are both implemented 
in Fortran.
Open Source
Radiation Environment Array Charge Transport (REACT) M FS-32001-1
The REACT detector array charge collection model is useful in the design of optical sensor missions. 
U.S. Release Only
Regional Hydrologic Extremes Assessment System (RHEAS) Software Framework N PO-49821-1
This software automates the deployment of nowcasting and forecasting hydrologic simulations and ingests 
satellite observations (through data assimilation), and it also allows the coupling of other environmental 
models and facilitates delivery of data products to users via a GIS-enabled database. 
Open Source
Retrieval and Validation of Total Seasonal Liquid Water Amounts  
in the Percolation Zone of Greenland Ice Sheet Using L-band Radiometry N PO-53278-1
Estimate and validate the total seasonal liquid water amounts in the percolation zone of the Greenland ice 
sheet using SMAP L-band radiometry.
General Public Release
Retrospective Analysis Toolbox for Ionospheric Total Electron Content Maps NP O-52896-1
This is an analysis toolbox for ionospheric total electron content (TEC) maps. The toolbox consists of two 
parts, a feature extraction program and a transfer entropy calculator. The feature extraction program is 
capable of extracting characteristics of local TEC intensifications from global ionospheric TEC maps. The 
transfer entropy calculator is capable of quantifying solar and interplanetary driving of the extracted TEC 
intensifications.
General Public Release
SAIC Algorithm Test Bed for Asteroid Detection (SALTAD), Version 1.5 G SC-16050-1
Composed of a series of C-language models, the SALTAD software package processes multi-frame image 
data to detect moving asteroids in a star-cluttered background. The software is highly modularized for 
interfacing with existing near-Earth asteroid search facility software.
U.S. Release Only
Simple Thermal Environment Model (STEM) User’s Guide M FS-31728-1
Helpful in the thermal analysis of near-Earth spacecraft, the STEM User’s Guide is a Fortran-based program 
that provides engineering estimates of top-of-atmosphere albedo and outgoing longwave radiation. 
U.S. Release Only
=====PAGE 163=====
Environmental Science  (Earth, Air, Space, Exoplanet)
154
NASA Technology Transfer Program  Software Catalog 2025-26
Single Doppler Retrieval Toolkit (SingleDop) M FS-33272-1
SingleDop is a software module, written in the Python programming language, that will retrieve 
two-dimensional low-level winds from either real or simulated Doppler radar data. It mimics the functionality 
of the algorithm described in the following reference: Xu et al., 2006: Background error covariance functions 
for vector wind analyses using Doppler-radar radial-velocity observations. Q. J. R. Meteorol. Soc., 132, 
2887-2904. The interface is simplified to a single line of code in the end user’s Python scripts, making 
implementation of the algorithm in their research analyses very easy. The software package also interfaces 
well with other open-source radar packages, such as the Python ARM Radar Toolkit (Py-ART). Simple 
visualization (including vector and contour plots) and save/load routines (to preserve analysis results) are 
also provided.
Open Source
Software for Monitoring the Phenology, Distribution, and Mortality  
of Selected Tropical Trees From Space N PO-53079-1
This software comprises a set of tools to fetch imagery from commercial satellite imaging company Planet, 
perform labeling of the imagery using the Labelbox platform, and train, evaluate, and deploy a machine 
learning model for detecting flowering tree species within the images.
General Public Release
Software Reader for the Copernicus Global 90m Digital Elevation Model (DEM) G SC-19237-1
The software uses command line input of the latitude and longitude geographic coordinates, accesses the 
Copernicus Global (GLO) 90 m digital elevation model (DEM) cloud optimized GeoTIFF data available within 
the AWS Cloud, processes these files to geolocate the pixel closest to the provided coordinates and returns 
the surface elevation in meters. This code was developed in Python and it could be used for algorithm 
development and production applications.
Open Source
Space Physics Data Facility (SPDF) Web Services G SC-14730-1
These Web services provide a distributed programming interface to a portion of the Space Physics Data 
Facility (SPDF) software. The technology conforms to all applicable Web service specifications of the World 
Wide Web Consortium. 
Open Source
Space Weather Android App G SC-16321-1
Developed for the Community Coordinated Modeling Center, this Android application displays space 
weather information. Users can swipe between space weather data products to see the latest available 
data; pan and zoom to see a detailed view of any particular product; rearrange and add space weather data 
products to the application layout; and browse a data catalog by category. 
General Public Release
Spacecraft Materials Selector (SMS) Expert System M FS-31328-1
The SMS knowledge base is a preliminary design tool that provides estimates of environmental exposures 
and/or materials performance. Inputs may launch date, altitude, inclination, mission duration, and certain 
characteristics of satellite motion.
U.S. Release Only
Spectrometer Masks NP O-52379-1
The spectrometer mask software identifies instances within remote sensing data of clouds, flares from oil 
and has manufacturing, and specular reflection, used for bright targets that may indicate false positive gas 
plume detection. Subsequent imagery is generated and used as a mask for the remote sensing imagery.
General Public Release
=====PAGE 164=====
Environmental Science  (Earth, Air, Space, Exoplanet)
155
NASA Technology Transfer Program  Software Catalog 2025-26
SUDS Air Quality N PO-53145-1
Science Understanding Data Science: Air Quality is a research project from the Machine Learning and 
Instrument Autonomy group at the Jet Propulsion Laboratory. This project investigates driving features of 
pollution on scales finer than physical models operate on. By discovering and understanding these features, 
scientists may use this information to further improve the performance of physical models to better predict 
pollution.
General Public Release
Surface Temperature Initiated Closure Model (STIC) N PO-53156-1
This software package is a Python implementation of the Surface Temperature Initiated Closure (STIC) 
version 1.3 model designed to implement LST to solve the aerodynamic temperature, which is critical for 
ET modeling. The original STIC model produced by Kaniska Mallick (Mallick et al. 2015; 2018; 2022) was 
re-implemented from MATLAB code to Python by Gregory Halverson and Madeleine Pascolini-Campbell. 
It is intended for use by the Hyperspectral Thermal Emission Spectrometer (HyTES), MODIS/ASTER 
(MASTER) Airborne Simulator, Ecosystem Spaceborne Thermal Radiometer Experiment on Space Station 
(ECOSTRESS) mission and as a precursor for the Surface Biology and Geology (SBG) mission.
General Public Release
Terrestrial Observation and Prediction System (TOPS) Biogeochemical Cycle Model A RC-16197-1A
TOPS is a modeling software that integrates data from satellites, weather stations, climate models with 
ecosystem models to produce nowcasts and forecasts of ecological conditions. The key tools used in 
producing the nowcasts and forecasts are simulation models including biogeochemical and ecosystem 
models that estimate the states (vegetation leaf area, biomass, soil moisture, snow, etc.) and functions 
(evapotranspiration, photosynthesis, etc.) of various kinds of plant canopies (forests, crops, grass, shrubs). 
These ecological nowcasts and forecasts are akin to current and forecast weather conditions. Upon 
further refinement and testing, the ecological nowcasts and forecasts are useful for making a variety of 
management decisions such as irrigation scheduling, timing of field operations, preparing for floods/
droughts and vector-borne diseases, and crop phenology and production. 
U.S. and Foreign Release
The Charge Collector (TCC), Version 2.1 M FS-32019-1
TCC is a compilation of spacecraft charging tools including design guidelines and a variety of information 
from government/industry/academic databases and reports. 
U.S. Release Only
Thematic Observation Search, Segmentation, Collation and Analysis (TOS2CA) N PO-52835-1
TOS2CA is a user-driven, data-centric system that can identify, collate, statistically characterize and serve 
Earth system data relevant to a given phenomenon. Designed as a multi-discipline analytic collaborative 
framework (ACF), TOS2CA will not only facilitate the collation and analysis of data from disparate sources, 
it will also make it possible for scientists to establish science traceability requirements, quantify detection 
thresholds, define uncertainty requirements and establish data sufficiency to formulate truly innovative 
missions.
General Public Release
Thermal Correction of HVM3 Imaging Spectrometer Data N PO-53083-1
We apply a Bayesian model inversion approach to disentangle the temperature-dependent thermal 
emission signal and the solar-reflected portion, enabling thermally-corrected surface reflectance maps for 
instruments like JPL ’s High Resolution Volatiles and Minerals Mapper for the Moon (HVM3). The Bayesian 
strategy makes the ill-posed problem tractable by introducing background information about “legal” surface 
reflectance values in the form of a loose statistical prior developed from library spectra.
General Public Release
=====PAGE 165=====
Environmental Science  (Earth, Air, Space, Exoplanet)
156
NASA Technology Transfer Program  Software Catalog 2025-26
Thermally Sensitive ECOSTRESS Evapotranspiration Model  
Ensemble Evaluation and Development N PO-53157-1
This software is able to measure the error propagation of remotely sensed input variables to all major 
variables estimated in evapotranspiration modeling, including net radiation and soil heat flux. The software 
aims to address the critical need for evapotranspiration models that can accurately respond to changes in 
surface temperature observed at fine spatial resolution and frequent temporal resolution.
General Public Release
Time Series Product Tool (TSPT) 3.0  S SC-00404
The Time Series Product Tool (TSPT) is custom designed software developed to compute and display 
superior quality Normalized Difference Vegetation Index (NDVI) images from satellite data products for 
enabling or aiding rapid regional surveillance of canopy greenness for crops, forests, and other vegetative 
surfaces. TSPT was developed in the MATLAB programming environment, and allows users to compute and 
display various Moderate Resolution Imaging Spectroradiometer (MODIS) products as single time frame and 
multi-temporal change images, as time series plots at a selected location, or as temporally processed image 
videos. This is significant because the labor involved with manually creating these types and quantities 
of products is considerable; however, by using the TSPT software tool, this process becomes simplified, 
efficient, and largely automated.
U.S. Government Purpose Release
Titan Global Reference Atmospheric Model (Titan-GRAM), Version 1.0 M FS-32297-1
Titan GRAM is a Fortran-based program that provides engineering estimates of density, temperature, 
pressure, and winds for the Titan atmosphere. 
General Public Release
 
TPSSizer (aka TPSSZR): Vehicle TPS sizing program using FIAT A RC-15016-1A
A Thermal Protection System (TPS) sizing tool developed at ARC for use in conceptual level through detailed 
design level analysis. TPS sizing methodologies and data exchange interfaces with supporting disciplines 
were developed for TPSSizer. Additionally, the tool introduced improvement with the automatic generation 
of TPS stackups, automatic generation of aerothermal environment files, maintenance of consistent 
material properties descriptions, the capability to simultaneously evaluate multiple nominal and abort flight 
trajectories and the development of methodologies for the application of appropriate design margins.
U.S. and Foreign Release
Trapped Proton Model (TPM) MF S-31329-1
TPM determines the differential omnidirectional proton flux from 1 to 100 MeV. At high altitudes, the model 
is based on CRRESPRO developed by AFRL; at low altitudes, the model is based on data from the TIROS/
NOAA (POES) low-altitude polar-orbiting satellites. The model contains a true solar cycle variation and also 
contains sub-models for quiet and active magnetospheric states. 
U.S. Release Only
Trapped Radiation Models: Uncertainties for Spacecraft Design M FS-31319-1
The focus of this software development effort was to help spacecraft and payload designers to account for 
uncertainties in predictive models of the Earth’s trapped radiation environment. A tool was needed for more 
accurately determining radiation requirements and risks, which are essential elements for producing less 
expensive, more reliable spacecraft.
U.S. Release Only
=====PAGE 166=====
Environmental Science  (Earth, Air, Space, Exoplanet)
157
NASA Technology Transfer Program  Software Catalog 2025-26
TROPESS Open Source Utility tools N PO-51949-1
Each Earth science mission’s standard products differ from each other. There are no common utility tools 
that can be used from one project to another. So, in order to help end user / scientist to fully utilize the 
TROPESS standard products we realized that we must also provide the community some utility tools.
General Public Release
TROPOMI carbon monoxide data preprocessing NP O-53269-1
The software download TROPOMI carbon monoxide retrievals, aggregated individual retrievals to 2x2.5 
“super-obs”, then writes these data so that they can be assimilated by the CMS-Flux inversion system.
General Public Release
Veloserver NPO-53369-1
Veloserver is a geospatial data visualization server designed to dynamically return velocity data such as 
winds and ocean currents from weather models and other datasets. It returns the data in formats optimized 
for visualizing in a web client including animated vector streamlines via gribjson. It includes built-in caching 
to reduce requests to external data sources and deliver quick results. It was originally developed for 
the NASA Earth Surface Mineral Dust Source Investigation (EMIT) mission for use by the Multi-Mission 
Geographic Information System (MMGIS) software.
General Public Release
Venus Global Reference Atmospheric Model (Venus GRAM 2005), Version 1.0 M FS-32314-1
Venus GRAM 2005 is a Fortran-based program that provides engineering estimates of density, temperature, 
pressure, and winds for the Venus atmosphere. 
General Public Release
Visualization Exploration and Data Analysis (VEDA) M FS-34306-1
VEDA is an ecosystem of tools and services to address the need for open cyberinfrastructure for 
processing, analyzing, and visualizing Earth observation data.
Open Source
VNP43 BRDF Julia Implementation N PO-53158-1
The VNP43 BRDF (Bidirectional Reflectance Distribution Function) algorithm is a part of the Visible Infrared 
Imaging Radiometer Suite (VIIRS) onboard on the Suomi-National Polar-orbiting Partnership (NPP) satellite. 
This algorithm is used to continue the long-term remote sensing environmental data records (EDR) begun by 
the MODerate Resolution Imaging Spectroradiometer (MODIS) sensors.
General Public Release 
=====PAGE 167=====
158158
Materials  
and Processing
Parts, Manufacturing, Production Processes, Composites
158158
NASA astronaut and Expedition 72 Commander Suni Williams assembles the European Materials Aging experiment 
hardware for installation inside the Nanoracks Bishop airlock on the International Space Station in December of 2024. 
The investigation was to expose a variety of materials to the vacuum of space for about a year. Credit: NASA
=====PAGE 168=====
Materials and Processes
NASA Technology Transfer Program  Software Catalog 2025-26
159
Featured Software
Predict the Behavior of Blackbody Heated Surfaces DR C-015-017
In the analysis of radiation, it is helpful to be able to predict the heat transfer rate and the spectral 
distribution of emitted energy. This set of routines is written in Microsoft Visual Basic for Applications (VBA) 
and incorporates functions specific to Microsoft Excel that are useful for predicting the radiative behavior 
of heated surfaces. These routines include functions for calculating engineering quantities of primary 
importance to engineers and scientists such as radiative flux and spectral distributions. 
General Public Release
Scalable Implementation of Finite Elements by NASA (ScIFEN)  LA R-18720-1
The ScIFEN package is a parallel finite element analysis code that enables scalable solutions to 
computational mechanics problems by leveraging several open-source high-performance computing 
libraries for numerical linear algebra routines and parallel input/output. ScIFEN supports different finite 
element types, nonlinear material models, and boundary conditions and contains both implicit and explicit 
time-integration procedures called ScIFEi and ScIFEx, respectively.
U.S. Release Only
T0TEM: T0 Test Evaluation Module MF S-33829-1
The T0TEM (T0 Test Evaluation Module) is an analysis software for transition temperature tests performed 
under ASTM E1921 – Standard Test Method for Determination of Reference Temperature, T0, for Ferritic 
Steels in the Transition Range. T0 is the temperature at which a ferritic steel transitions from mostly ductile 
tearing to unstable cleavage failure mode. This software analyzes test results to determine T0, the master 
curve, confidence bounds, validity, margin adjustment, and inhomogeneity by simple, bi-modal, and multi-
modal methods. T0TEM also allows for batch analysis, raw data output, and plot creation.
General Public Release
159
=====PAGE 169=====
Materials and Processes
NASA Technology Transfer Program  Software Catalog 2025-26
160
1998 NIST-JANAF (National Institute of Standards and 
Technology-Joint Army Navy Air Force) Database Scanning and Plotting Program D RC-021-024
This is an interactive software application that contains fits of thermodynamic data contained in the Fourth 
Edition of the NIST-JANAF Thermochemical Tables. Fits for 1,068 common elemental and molecular species 
are contained within the database. The fitting coefficients provide predictive values covering a wide range of 
temperatures (in many cases for gas state species from 298.15 to 6,000 K). A total of 1,760 fits are included 
covering gas, solid, and liquid phases. Thermochemical properties that can conveniently be computed from 
the data fits include specific heat, entropy, enthalpy, free energy, and reduced free energy. The software is a 
Microsoft Excel-based application and allows extracted data to be used as inputs to other thermochemistry 
codes or used to compute thermochemical properties within Excel using supplied macros.
General Public Release
Abaqus User Subroutine Verification (abaverify) L AR-18938-1
abaverify is a collection of Python scripts that is used for testing and verifying the behavior of user 
subroutines for the commercial finite element code Abaqus.
Open Source
Acoustic Emission Analysis Applet (AEAA) Software L EW-19032-1
Post-processing software has been developed at NASA that is tailored for novel analysis of composite 
pressure vessel acoustic emission (AE) data. The software can be used with data acquired from Digital 
Wave, Inc., and Mistras Group (Physical Acoustics, Inc.) hardware.
U.S. Release Only
 
AladynPi: Adaptive Neural Network Molecular Dynamics Simulation Code  
with Physically Informed Potential: Computational Materials Mini-Application L AR-19727-1
A basic molecular dynamics codes written in FORTRAN 2008, which is designed to demonstrate the use 
of artificial neural networks (ANNs) in atomistic simulations. The role of ANNs is to efficiently reproduce 
the very complex energy landscape resulting from the atomic interactions in materials with the accuracy of 
the more expensive quantum mechanics-based calculations. AladynPi code is being released to serve as 
a training testbed for students and professors in academia to explore possible optimization algorithms for 
parallel computing on multiprocessor computers or computers equipped with graphic processing units.
Open Source
Calibration of the High Resolution Volatiles and Minerals Mapper for the Moon (HVM3) N PO-52587-1
This software is used in the analysis of data from the High Resolution Volatiles and Minerals Mapper for 
the Moon (HVM3). This instrument is an imaging spectrometer measuring from 600-3600 nm, which will be 
deployed on the Lunar Trailblazer mission to measure lunar volatiles. The software performs spectral and 
radiometric calibration of raw instrument science data.
General Public Release
Composite Damage (CompDam) Progressive Damage Analysis Software L AR-18832-1
This software predicts damage onset, damage progression, and structural collapse of structures 
manufactured of fiber-reinforced plastic laminates. The modeling of damage progression is undertaken at 
the meso-scale, where each ply of a laminate is represented as a homogeneous orthotropic continuum. All 
composite damage mechanisms (matrix cracking, fiber breaking and kinking, and delamination) and their 
interactions are also represented. The software is implemented as user-written subroutines for utilization 
with the Abaqus commercial finite element code. Input for CompDam includes ply-level material properties 
and interface properties obtained from standard material characterization tests. 
Open Source
=====PAGE 170=====
Materials and Processes
NASA Technology Transfer Program  Software Catalog 2025-26
161
CRYOLAVASAURUS NPO-53347-1
CRYOLAVASAURUS is a scientific modeling toolkit designed to simulate cryovolcanic activity at Europa and 
its observable signatures, with potential applications to other Ocean Worlds. The project includes a series 
of MATLAB scripts that model different physical, geological, thermal, and compositional components of this 
process, as well as data inputs and visual outputs.
General Public Release
Floating Node Method Composites Simulation Toolbox (FNMCST) L AR-19000-1
The FNMCST toolbox is a research code used to investigate and develop a high-fidelity numerical approach 
and advanced physical models to simulate damage progression in composite materials in 3D with high fidelity.
U.S. Release Only
MATLAB Software Associated with “Practical Micromechanics  
of Composite Materials” Book, Elsevier Publishing  L EW-20181-1
This MATLAB software toolset was developed for use in solving the example and exercises provided in the 
book entitled “Practical Micromechanics of Composite Materials,” authored by Prof. J Aboudi, S. M. Arnold 
and B.A. Bednarcyk. The MATLAB scripts and functions calculate composite effective properties, margins 
of safety, and progressive damage of unidirectional and/or composite laminates using classical ply-based 
lamination theory, stand-alone micromechanics theories (such as  Mori-Tanka, MOC, GMC, HFGMC along 
with failure theories and margin of safety calculations) or micromechanics-based classical lamination theory  
to illustrate their utility for the design and analysis of advanced composites.
Open Source
Microscopy Segmentation Models  L EW-20249-1
A new technique was developed for creating highly accurate microscopy image segmentation models with 
less training data. This technique uses transfer learning from classification models that were pretrained 
on the massive microscopy image database from the NASA ASG lab. Developing accurate segmentation 
models is significant because it is the first and hardest step in automatically quantifying microstructure 
features which is critical to linking the processing-structure-property relationships of materials. By 
quantitatively understanding these relationships, one may discover and develop new materials through 
traditional or data-driven methods.
Open Source
MicroStructPy: A Microstructure Mesh Generator for Heterogeneous Materials M SC-26527-1
This technology is software that generates meshes of materials composed of dissimilar constituents. 
Example materials include carbon fiber composites, metallic alloys, ceramics, and rocks. These meshes are 
unstructured, meaning the mesh elements are triangular in 2D and tetrahedral in 3D.
Open Source
NASA Multiscale Analysis Tool (NASMAT) Version 4.0 L EW-20244-1
NASMAT serves as a state-of-the-art, “plug and play,” software package utilizes multiscale recursive 
micromechanics as a platform for massively multiscale modeling of hierarchical materials and structures 
subjected to thermomechanical loads on high-performance computing systems.
U.S. and Foreign Release
Optimal Feature Selection Tool with Machine Learning  L EW-20350-1
The design tool was developed to choose the optimum set of critical features of data that should be 
controlled to achieve desired target variable for a given acceptable uncertainty. The tool can conduct 
data science approaches such as exploratory data analysis, low variance threshold, filter, wrapper, and 
embedded feature selection technique. The integrated techniques can be applied to determine the critical 
features that should be controlled to achieve target properties for material systems.
Open Source
=====PAGE 171=====
Materials and Processes
NASA Technology Transfer Program  Software Catalog 2025-26
162
ParaGrandMC: Parallel Grand Canonical Monte Carlo Simulation Code, Version 2 L AR-19893-1
This is version 2 of ParaGrandMC is a highly parallelized code in FORTRAN for simulating the 
thermodynamic evolution of metal alloy systems at atomic level, and predicting their thermodynamic state, 
phase diagram, chemical composition and mechanical properties. The approach taken is based on evolving 
an initially given atomic system (defined through a list of atomic coordinates of all participating atoms) 
using Monte Carlo and Molecular Dynamics algorithms. Atomic configurations, in terms of coordinates 
of all atoms, are stored periodically for a post-processing analysis, such as phase identification, lattice 
parameter estimates, free energy integration, etc. The numerical implementation is highly parallelized, 
allowing simulations of multimilion atom systems. The current release has two new interatomic potentials 
added: Bond Order Potential (BOP), and Physically Informed Neural Network Potential (PINN). In addition, 
capabilities to compute diffusivity, thermal conductivity, and viscosity are also introduced.
U.S. Release Only
Porous Material Analysis Toolbox Based on OpenFOAM (PATO) A RC-16680-1C
PATO (Porous material Analysis Toolbox based on OpenFOAM) is a modular research and development 
platform for multiphase porous reactive materials submitted to high-temperature environments or other 
unusual conditions. It can be run as a simple Fourier heat transfer code or include more advanced features 
such as internal decomposition (pyrolysis, vaporization), gas-gas and gas-solid chemical interactions 
(combustion, cracking, coking), gas species transport (convection, diffusion), and solid morphology 
evolutions (internal density changes, surface ablation). PATO is implemented as a C++ top-level module 
of the open-source (GNU GPL) Computational Fluid Dynamics software OpenFOAM. This offering is not 
approved or endorsed by OpenCFD Limited, the producer of the OpenFOAM software and owner of the 
OpenFOAM and OpenCFD trademarks. PATO also uses the open-source (GNU LGPL) thermodynamics, 
transport, and chemistry library Mutation++ produced by the von Karman Institute for Fluid Dynamics.
Open Source
Porous Microstructure Analysis (PuMA) A RC-17920-1
PuMA software has been developed in order to compute effective material properties and perform material 
response simulations on digitized microstructures of porous media. PuMA is able to import digital 3D 
images obtained from X-ray microtomography or to generate artificial microstructures that mimic real 
materials. PuMA also provides a module for interactive 3D visualizations. Version 3 includes modules to 
compute simple morphological properties such as porosity, volume fractions, pore diameter, and specific 
surface area. Additional capabilities include the determination of effective thermal and electrical conductivity 
(including the ability to simulate local anisotropy), effective diffusivity and tortuosity from the continuum to 
the rarefied regime, and techniques to determine local material orientation. 
U.S. and Foreign Release
Predict the Behavior of Blackbody Heated Surfaces D RC-015-017
In the analysis of radiation, it is helpful to be able to predict the heat transfer rate and the spectral 
distribution of emitted energy. This set of routines is written in Microsoft Visual Basic for Applications (VBA) 
and incorporates functions specific to Microsoft Excel that are useful for predicting the radiative behavior 
of heated surfaces. These routines include functions for calculating engineering quantities of primary 
importance to engineers and scientists such as radiative flux and spectral distributions. 
General Public Release
Scalable Implementation of Finite Elements by NASA (ScIFEN)  L AR-18720-1
The ScIFEN package is a parallel finite element analysis code that enables scalable solutions to 
computational mechanics problems by leveraging several open-source high-performance computing 
libraries for numerical linear algebra routines and parallel input/output. ScIFEN supports different finite 
element types, nonlinear material models, and boundary conditions and contains both implicit and explicit 
time-integration procedures called ScIFEi and ScIFEx, respectively.
U.S. Release Only
=====PAGE 172=====
Materials and Processes
NASA Technology Transfer Program  Software Catalog 2025-26
163
Scalable Implementation of Finite Elements by NASA (ScIFEN), Version 2 L AR-19121-1
ScIFEN 2 is a 3D solid mechanics C++ code that provides a parallel implementation of the finite element 
method (FEM). ScIFEN includes several standard linear and non-linear material models including linear 
elastic isotropic, linear hardening plasticity, and crystal plasticity models. It supports various applied 
loadings including prescribed displacements and forces, surface tractions and pressures, and body forces. 
ScIFEN supports both implicit time integration (ScIFEi driver) and explicit time integration (ScIFEx driver). 
ScIFEN relies on several open-source libraries for scalability and efficiency, including PETSc, HDF5, and 
MOAB.
U.S. Release Only
SMAnalytics: Software for the Automated Analysis, Summary,  
and Reporting of Shape Memory Alloy Tests L EW-20278-1
This software describes a new program for automated analysis, summarizing, and reporting of shape 
memory alloy (SMA) test data. The current version allows automated and standardized analysis of data 
from standardized test methods pertinent to shape memory alloys: ASTM E3097 Uniaxial Constant Force 
Thermal Cycling (UCFTC), ASTM E3098 Uniaxial Pre-Strain and Thermal Free Recovery (UPFR), and ASTM 
F2004 Differential Scanning Calorimetry (DSC). The software allows analysis of variants of these methods, 
such as multi-cycle, multi-stress UCFTC and UPFR. The program allows for extraction of multiple properties 
including transformation temperatures, transformation and residual strains, strain recovery, and other related 
properties. It allows automated and uniform generation of specified material property reports which could 
be used by material suppliers or test labs for certification documents. In addition, it allows exporting of the 
complete summarized material test data which can then be imported into the NASA Shape Memory Material 
Database.
U.S. and Foreign Release
Tool for Analysis of Surface Cracks (TASC) M FS-33082-1
Created using the commercial math analysis software MATLAB, TASC enables the easy computation of 
nonlinear J-integral solutions for surface-cracked plates in tension by accessing and interpolating between 
the 600 nonlinear surface crack solutions documented in NASA/TP-2011-217480. The only required inputs 
to the program are the surface crack dimensions, plate cross-section dimensions, and material properties. 
TASC provides a convenient and easy-to-use interface for the solution set that allows a novice user to obtain 
a fast and reliable fracture toughness solution. 
Open Source
T0TEM: T0 Test Evaluation Module M FS-33829-1
The T0TEM (T0 Test Evaluation Module) is an analysis software for transition temperature tests performed 
under ASTM E1921 – Standard Test Method for Determination of Reference Temperature, T0, for Ferritic 
Steels in the Transition Range. T0 is the temperature at which a ferritic steel transitions from mostly ductile 
tearing to unstable cleavage failure mode. This software analyzes test results to determine T0, the master 
curve, confidence bounds, validity, margin adjustment, and inhomogeneity by simple, bi-modal, and multi-
modal methods. T0TEM also allows for batch analysis, raw data output, and plot creation.
General Public Release
UnitcellHub NPO-53101-1
UnitcellHub provides the user tools to design application-specific lattice structures. These tools span 
the whole design life cycle, including preliminary design space exploration, CAD geometry creation, and 
prediction of mechanical and thermal characterization for point designs.
General Public Release
=====PAGE 173=====
164164
Operations
Ground Software, Telemetry, Command and Control, 
Global Positioning Systems, Extravehicular Activity, 
Radio, Communications
164164
Members of the Artemis I launch team participate in a countdown simulation in the Launch Control Center at NASA’s 
Kennedy Space Center in Florida in February of 2020. The team of nearly 100 engineers from Orion, SLS (Space 
Launch System), and Exploration Ground Systems came together to work through a series of simulated challenges, 
as well as the final countdown procedure. Credit: NASA
=====PAGE 174=====
Operations
165
NASA Technology Transfer Program  Software Catalog 2025-26
Featured Software
Debris Assessment Software (DAS), Version 3.2.6 MS C-26690-1
The Debris Assessment Software (DAS) is provided by the NASA Orbital Debris Program Office as a means 
of assessing, during the planning and design phase, space missions’ compliance with NASA’s requirements 
for reduction of orbital debris. DAS is designed to assist NASA programs in performing orbital debris 
assessments, as described in NASA Technical Standard 8719.14, Process for Limiting Orbital Debris. The 
software reflects the structure of the standard and provides the user with tools to assess compliance with 
the requirements. If a program is noncompliant, DAS may also be used to explore debris mitigation options 
to bring a program within requirements.
General Public Release
GNSS-Inferred Positioning System and Orbit Analysis  
Simulation Software (GIPSY-OASIS)  NP O-19636-1
GIPSY-OASIS is widely used for geophysical and global positioning system research.
U.S. Government Purpose Release
Consultative Committee for Space Data Systems (CCSDS)  
File Delivery Protocol (CFDP) Software Library, Version 3.1 GS C-14993-1
This library provides for the reliable transfer of large data blocks to and from spacecraft. It implements the 
international standard CFDP protocol, can be used from mission to mission, and supports both ground and 
flight software.
U.S. Government Purpose Release
165
=====PAGE 175=====
Operations
166
NASA Technology Transfer Program  Software Catalog 2025-26
3D-Nc: Expected Collision Rates for Tracked Satellites  G SC-18593-1
The NASA Conjunction Assessment Risk Analysis (CARA) team has recently developed new algorithms 
and software to estimate collision rates and probabilities between Earth-orbiting satellites.  The formulation 
entitled “Expected Collision Rates for Tracked Satellites” provides an innovative method to estimate 
collision risks based on the expected collision rate and number of collisions, which are both closely related 
to the collision probability. The new formulation accounts for the non-linear orbital motion of the satellites 
and derives expressions that form the basis for Monte Carlo simulations, as well as semi-analytical 
approximations applicable to single- and multi-encounter interactions.
Open Source
Approximate Cartesian Control for Robotic Tool Usage with Graceful Degradation  M SC-25958-1 
This is a software toolkit for flexible tool use by robotic manipulators. The suite of state-of-the-art algorithms 
is focused on extending current pick-and-place planning and control methods to enable robust tool usage 
by humanoid and other armed robots. The system provides more intuitive tools for the user of the robotic 
manipulator, including visualization tools for defining tool use scenarios, including Cartesian tolerances 
along trajectories and expected forces/torques on the tool tip. This allows robots to be more capable and 
more reliable during long-term autonomous tasks by significantly improving the ability of remote supervisors 
to command complex tool-usage tasks, by enabling robots to operate safely alongside humans during 
shared tasks, and by providing a general tool usage framework that works with novel tools and with any 
robot configuration.
Open Source
Astrobee Control Station A RC-17994-1A
An extension of the Visual Environment for Remote Virtual Exploration (VERVE) that has been customized to 
operate the Astrobee robot on the International Space Station (ISS). The Astrobee robot has two purposes: 
it is a remotely-operated mobile camera and survey instrument for ground controllers, and it is an extensible 
zero gravity research platform for guest scientists. Ground controllers use the Astrobee Control Station to fly 
Astrobee, control its instruments, watch live video from its cameras, monitor its position and other telemetry, 
and download and delete collected data. Guest Scientists use the Astrobee Control Station to start and stop 
their experiments onboard Astrobee, and to monitor custom data and telemetry from their experiments. 
Open Source
Astrobee Control Station Binary A RC-17994-1B
An extension of the Visual Environment for Remote Virtual Exploration (VERVE) that has been customized 
to operate the Astrobee robot on the International Space Station (ISS). The Astrobee robot has two 
purposes: it is a remotely-operated mobile camera and survey instrument for ground controllers, and it 
is an extensible zero gravity research platform for guest scientists. Ground controllers use the Astrobee 
Control Station to fly Astrobee, control its instruments, watch live video from its cameras, monitor its 
position and other telemetry, and download and delete collected data. Guest Scientists use the Astrobee 
Control Station to start and stop their experiments onboard Astrobee, and to monitor custom data 
and telemetry from their experiments. The Binary for US/Foreign version may be distributed to NASA 
researchers, third party schools, colleges and universities provided that all use of RTI software is limited 
solely to research activities associated with the Astrobee.
U.S. and Foreign Release
Autonomous eXplorer Control System (AXCS) A RC-16721-1
AXCS enables smartphones and other mobile devices to be utilized as a ground-based test bed for 
operations in extreme environments. For NASA, the technology is currently being used to evaluate hardware 
for balloon launches. The software’s tool kits provide environmental and situational measurements, 
command and data handing (CD&H) functions, events timing, data logging, and communications with 
external devices. 
Open Source
=====PAGE 176=====
Operations
167
NASA Technology Transfer Program  Software Catalog 2025-26
CalSimHydro NPO-48235-1
This Web-based, Google Earth-enabled interactive interface provides a tool for configuring, running, 
viewing, and downloading the results of a CalSim 3.0 Hydrology Preprocessor program. The software allows 
the user to (1) interact with a map of water budget areas (WBAs) and display data for a selected WBA in 
tabular form or as a time series plot; (2) edit input and run a CalSim 3.0 Hydrology Preprocessor; and (3) 
compare results with base-run output and download the output file. CalSimHydro will be delivered to the 
California Department of Water Resource (DWR) and released as a part of the CalSim 3.0 system.
U.S. Government Purpose Release
CARA SDK: Two-Dimension Probability of Collision (Pc) Calculation G SC-18016-1
The two-dimension probability of collision (Pc) calculation module set is one of the Conjunction Assessment 
Risk Analysis (CARA) Software Development Kit (SDK). It implements the calculation of the probability of 
collision of two satellites given the state estimates and covariances, following the methodology of Foster and 
Estes (1992).
Open Source
Command, Control, Communications, and Intelligence (C3I)  
Delay/Disruption-Tolerant Networking (DTN) Software L EW-18493-1
This code is a DTN implementation of the Constellation Program’s C3I software.
U.S. Government Purpose Release
Command, Control, Communications, and Intelligence (C3I) Networking Software L EW-18494-1
This implementation of the Constellation Program’s C3I software has provided an environment for the  
prototype testing of a variety of networking protocols.
U.S. Government Purpose Release
Command, Control, Communications, and Intelligence (C3I)  
Voice Exchange Software L EW-18495-1
This implementation of the Constellation Program’s C3I software has provided an environment for the 
prototype testing of a variety of voice exchange components.
U.S. Government Purpose Release
Conjunction Consequence Assessment G SC-18068-1
Determines the likelihood of a catastrophic collision and estimates the amount of debris likely to be 
produced by a particular satellite conjunction should a collision actually occur. Includes methodologies to 
produce a PDF of reasonable mass values for the secondary object so that the equations for catastrophic 
collision determination and debris production estimation can be employed, following the work of Hejduk 
et al. (2017).
Open Source
Constellation Light Pollution Evaluation Software G SC-18848-1
The Evaluate Constellation software uses a semi-empirical method to estimate the statistically 
expected number of brighter-than-recommended constellation satellites above a representative, 
low-latitude ground-based observer  —  a s ingle metric that simultaneously incorporates the effects of 
constellation population, altitude, brightness, and variability. It then conducts a two-part evaluation 
based on this metric, which provides a quantitative method of comparing the potential impact that 
different constellations might have on ground-based visible and near-IR astronomical observations. The 
Evaluate Constellation algorithm is based on a method of estimating the statistically expected number 
of brighter-than-recommended constellation satellites above a ground-based observer, which is a novel 
semi-empirical approach based on a newly-developed evaluation metric that incorporates the effects of 
constellation population, altitude, brightness, and variability.
Open Source
=====PAGE 177=====
Operations
168
NASA Technology Transfer Program  Software Catalog 2025-26
Consultative Committee for Space Data Systems (CCSDS)  
File Delivery Protocol (CFDP) Software Library, Version 3.1 G SC-14993-1
This library provides for the reliable transfer of large data blocks to and from spacecrafts. It implements the 
international standard CFDP protocol, can be used from mission to mission, and supports both ground and 
flight software.
U.S. Government Purpose Release
Debris Assessment Software (DAS), Version 3.2.6 M SC-26690-1
The Debris Assessment Software (DAS) is provided by the NASA Orbital Debris Program Office as a means 
of assessing, during the planning and design phase, space missions’ compliance with NASA’s requirements 
for reduction of orbital debris. DAS is designed to assist NASA programs in performing orbital debris 
assessments, as described in NASA Technical Standard 8719.14, Process for Limiting Orbital Debris. The 
software reflects the structure of the standard and provides the user with tools to assess compliance with 
the requirements. If a program is noncompliant, DAS may also be used to explore debris mitigation options 
to bring a program within requirements.
General Public Release
Dorado-Scheduling  G SC-18694-1
Dorado is a proposed space mission for ultraviolet follow-up of gravitational wave events. This repository 
contains a simple target of opportunity observation planner for Dorado. Features include: 1. Global: jointly 
and globally solves the problems of tiling (the set of telescope boresight orientations and roll angles) and 
the scheduling (which tile is observed at what time), rather than solving each sub-problem one at a time. 
2. Optimal: generally solves all the way to optimality, rather than finding merely a “good enough” solution. 
3. Fast: solve an entire orbit in about 5 minutes. 4. General: does not depend on heuristics of any kind.  
5. Flexible: problem is formulated in the versatile framework of mixed integer programming
Open Source
DTN Marshall Enterprise M FS-33978-1
DTN Marshall Enterprise is a fully compliant CCSDS Delay/Disruption Tolerant Network (DTN) router that has 
been used to conduct International Space Station payload operations for many years. Communications in 
space are characterized by their disrupted, wireless nature. This software, using the bundle protocol (BP), 
can maximize the efficient use of links to and among spacecraft. As part of NASA’s efforts to deploy DTN 
in space, the HOSC developed a general purpose DTN router based on the SourceForge DTN2 version 6 
reference code and reinvented a previously developed capability called the External Router. 
Open Source
Electronic Procedure Application Software Suite (EPASS) Library Administration  
(LibAdmin) 1.1 and Subs (1.XX) M SC-27734-1
The EPASS LibAdmin application allows users to manage Artemis procedures libraries used by ground flight 
controllers, onboard crew members, and onboard the eProc display on various vehicle avionics system.
U.S. Government Purpose Release
Global Precipitation Measurement (GPM) Spacecraft  
Flight Software (FSW), Version 4.7.2 G SC-16669-1
The Global Precipitation Measurement (GPM) Spacecraft Flight Software (FSW) controls and coordinates 
all aspects of the spacecraft’s operation in nominal and anomolous conditions. It distributes commands 
to, and collects data from, all spacecraft subsystems and the science instruments. The FSW controls high-
gain antenna pointing to TDRSS satellites and manages communications with the ground controllers in real 
time to receive commands (during SSA contacts) and send housekeeping telemetry data during SSA and 
MA contacts. It sends science data using the Class-2 CCSDS File Delivery Protocol (CFDP). The GPM FSW 
monitors the health of most orbiter subsystems and takes corrective actions when necessary. 
U.S. Government Purpose Release
=====PAGE 178=====
Operations
169
NASA Technology Transfer Program  Software Catalog 2025-26
GNSS-Inferred Positioning System and Orbit Analysis  
Simulation Software (GIPSY-OASIS)  N PO-19636-1
GIPSY-OASIS is widely used for geophysical and global positioning system research.
U.S. Government Purpose Release
Goddard Enhanced Onboard Navigation System (GEONS) G SC-14687-1
GEONS processes data from standard GPS receivers, communication equipment, and/or attitude sensors 
to produce accurate, absolute, relative onboard navigation solutions in real time. Navigation products from 
GEONS support additional autonomous functions, including onboard maneuver control, science viewing, 
and relative navigation for formation keeping.
U.S. Government Purpose Release
Goddard Mission Services Evolution Center (GMSEC)  
Application Programming Interface (API), Version 4.6 G SC-18523-1
The GMSEC architecture is a comprehensive flight and ground system architecture that spans the full 
mission life cycle. Software components use the GMSEC Architecture API to connect to a middleware 
software messaging bus that in turn is responsible for message routing and delivery. This software release 
contains enhancements to previous releases of the GMSEC API, including greater reliability and enhanced 
usability such as: Heartbeat Generator that allows a component to easily publish heartbeat messages; the 
ability for Field objects to be cloned; and extended log information for the Python3 binding. 
Open Source
GRC Lunar Site Analysis Software L EW-20529-1
This set of analysis functions can be used to assess lunar landing site solar illumination and communication 
availability using lunar terrain masks obtained from the terrain data, obtained from measurements of 
the Lunar Orbiter Laser Altimeter (LOLA) instrument aboard the Lunar Reconnaissance Orbiter (LRO) 
spacecraft, to model terrain-based blockage.
U.S. Release Only
High-Speed Software Implementation of Delay-Tolerant Networking (DTN) L EW-19897-1
This software prototype called High-Speed DTN (or HDTN) takes advantage of modern hardware platforms 
to offer substantial improvement on latency and throughput with respect to DTN implementations that exist 
today. Specifically, our implementation maintains compatibility with existing implementations of DTN that 
conform to IETF RFC 5050, while simultaneously defining a new data format that is better suited to higher-
rate operation in many cases. It defines and adopts a massively parallel, pipelined, and message-oriented 
architecture, which allows the system to scale gracefully as the resources available to the system increase.  
HDTN’s architecture additionally supports hooks for replacing various elements of the processing pipeline 
with specialized hardware accelerators, which can be used to offer improved size, weight, and power 
(SWaP) characteristics at the cost of increased development, complexity, and cost.
Open Source
Input Device Framework (IDF) M SC-25810-1
This framework is for mapping physical input devices (joysticks, gaming controllers, custom control panels, 
etc.) to application-specific virtual controller interfaces. 
Open Source
=====PAGE 179=====
Operations
170
NASA Technology Transfer Program  Software Catalog 2025-26
Inspire Connect Explore (ICE) K SC-13772
The ICE application is an inspirational tool utilized by the Education and External Relations organization to 
increase STEM participation. In addition to static content such as biographies and career information, the 
Web site allows dynamic (approved) content where students may post questions to specific employees 
about their degree experience and career advancement. This new application was developed utilizing ASP.
NET, HTML, and SQL Server 2008 technologies. Access is controlled through role-based security at the 
application level. Employees are provided automated log-in capability after which they may create and edit 
their inspirational biographies and career information or respond to questions posted by the public. 
U.S. Release Only
Interoperable Remote Component (IRC)  G SC-14308-1
IRC provides robust interactive and distributed control/monitoring of remote instruments. The IRC 
architecture combines the processing capabilities of Java with the power of XML to express hierarchical 
data in a human-readable, platform-independent format. 
Open Source
Java Astrodynamics Toolkit (JAT) G SC-14912-1
JAT is a collection of Java components that aid flight dynamics engineers in performing space mission 
design; trajectory optimization; and spacecraft navigation, attitude-determination, and control systems 
analysis. Current capabilities include orbit propagation, orbit determination, maneuver planning, spacecraft 
attitude simulation, and 3D orbit and attitude visualization.
Open Source
Maestro Science Activity Planner for Mars N PO-45871-1
The Maestro Science Activity Planner (Maestro) provides an intuitive interface to the Mars Exploration 
Rovers Mission, combining cutting-edge visualization with sophisticated planning and simulation 
capabilities.
U.S. Government Purpose Release
Maneuver Trade Space  GS C-17683-1
The Maneuver Trade Space tool is used to assist in the operational decision making of the propulsive needs 
vs the time frame for a satellite maneuvering to avoid conjunctions with orbital debris and/or other satellites.
General Public Release
Mission Display (MDX) System N PO-35238-1
The MDX System can be used to visualize a wide variety of raster scan data, including IFSAR images and 
DEM. The technology enables the user to view very large data sets (greater than 2 gigabytes per image) and 
offers several ways to combine information from different data sets into a single display window.
U.S. Government Purpose Release
Monitoring and ANalysis for Gravity Operations (MANGO) Tool N PO-52991-1
MANGO is intended to make it easier to monitor and analyze data collected from Gravity Recovery and 
Climate Experiment (GRACE-FO/GRACE-C) and produced by science data systems.
General Public Release
Monte Carlo Pc Calculation from TCA (in equinoctial elements) G SC-18072-1
Calculates the probability of collision (Pc) between two conjuncting satellites using a Monte Carlo technique, 
executing the draws from the propagated states and covariances at the time of closest approach (TCA) 
between the two satellites.
Open Source
=====PAGE 180=====
Operations
171
NASA Technology Transfer Program  Software Catalog 2025-26
MSLICE Sequencing N PO-47292-1
Developed for the NASA Mars Science Laboratory (MSL) mission, MSLICE Sequencing is a graphical tool 
for writing sequences and integrating them into RML files, as well as producing SCMF files for uplink. When 
operated in a testbed environment, it also supports uplinking these SCMF files to the testbed via Chill.
U.S. Government Purpose Release
Multipath TCP (MPTCP) Tools, Analytics, and Configurations L EW-19620-1
This collection of tools, scripts, and configurations allows the use of Multipath Transmission Control Protocol 
(TCP) across multiple point-to-point interfaces such as those commonly used for satellite and optical links.
Open Source
          
NASA Operational Simulator for Small Satellites (NOS3) G SC-17737-1
NOS3 is an open-source software only test bed for small satellites. It is a collection of Linux executables 
and libraries. Current simulations are based on commercial off the shelf (COTS) hardware that is being used 
on the STF-1 CubeSat. It is intended to easily interface with flight software developed using the NASA Core 
Flight System (cFS).
Open Source 
NOSS: NDAS One-Stop Shop S SC-00529
NOSS is a Web-based central configuration interface for the NASA Data Acquisition System (NDAS), or it 
can be used additionally as a front end for other types of data acquisition systems. NOSS is accessed using 
a Web browser and allows for concurrent multi-user access. After configuration is complete, a user can 
export an XML that can be used in the configuration of a data acquisition system.
U.S. Government Purpose Release
Open Mission Control Technologies (Open MCT) A RC-15256-1D
Open MCT is an open-source and Web-based mission control framework for visualization of data on 
desktop and mobile devices. Open MCT is designed for analysis, visualization, operation, and support of 
spacecraft missions. It provides an extensible plugin system allowing it to be integrated with existing ground 
systems and adapted to support multiple missions, as well as non-space applications.
Open Source
Oversight  G SC-18591-1
A Splunk Application solution for aggregated hardware and software asset inventory. The application 
identifies all hosts on the network, reports on host compliance status, and tracks for gaps in monitoring 
tools.
Open Source
Portable C/C++ STRS Operating Environment Library and Reference Implementation L EW-19644-1
A portable software library which implements the fundamental components of the Space 
Telecommunications Radio System (STRS) operating environment as described in the latest revision of 
NASA standard 4009 (NASA-STD-4009A). This software library is intended to reduce the development cost 
associated with implementing an STRS operating environment by providing a C/C++ standards-compliant 
reference implementation of the basic functions described in the architecture document.
U.S. and Foreign Release
=====PAGE 181=====
Operations
172
NASA Technology Transfer Program  Software Catalog 2025-26
Python Ground Station for a Core Flight System  
with CCSDS Electronic Data Sheets Support L EW-20210-1
This software package consists of a Python-based graphical user interface (GUI) which serves as a generic 
telemetry and telecommand system for any mission that uses Core Flight System (cFS) with CCSDS 
Electronic Data Sheets (EDS) support. The GUI utilizes python bindings to automatically read all of the 
information contained in the mission’s EDS Library and Core Flight Executive (cFE) Mission Library. This 
allows the software to send any command or decode any telemetry message defined in the EDS files. Utility 
scripts are also included for terminal operation and telemetry data processing.
Open Source
ROBUS-2 Fault-Tolerant Broadcast Communication System for Modular Avionics L AR-17264-1
ROBUS-2 is a time-division, multiple-access broadcast communication system that uses a time-indexed 
communication schedule for medium-access control. The technology provides guaranteed fault-tolerant 
services that include: message broadcast (Byzantine Agreement), dynamic communication schedule 
update, time reference (clock synchronization), and distributed diagnosis (group membership).
Open Source
Satellite State Estimate Covariance Realism Evaluation  G SC-18655-1
This software tool ingests position residuals between predicted and as-flown ephemerides, as well as 
associated covariances, and performs a number of statistical tests to determine whether the predicted 
covariance is a realistic description of actual state errors.
Open Source
SCaN Optical Link Assessment Tool, Version 2 L EW-19313-1
A calculation procedure has been designed and implemented in software that enables the specification 
and design of a space-based optical communications system. The resulting optical link budget essentially 
accounts for the communication power flow through the entire optical communications channel from 
the transmitter to the receiver and yields design specifications for the optical system necessary to 
assure reliable data transmission with desired operational metrics such as data rate, link margin, etc. 
The link assessment tool takes into account all of the sources of deleterious noise that enters into the 
communications process such as electronically generated noise in the optical detector and stray optical 
irradiance from external sources. The link budget has the capability of being interfaced with the orbital 
element calculations of the Satellite Tool Kit (STK) to allow the dynamic description and evolution of optical 
link operation from any space-borne satellite within the solar system to and from Earth. The current version 
implements PPM and DPSK modulation types that can use PIN, APD, or nanowire optical detectors in the 
presence of atmospheric turbulence. Coded and un-coded link power margins are provided.
U.S. Release Only
Single Covariance Maximum Pc G SC-17900-1
The Single Covariance Maximum Pc Offline Tool estimates the upper bound for probability of collision (Pc) 
when only one object’s covariance information is available. The tool uses a method proposed by Frisbee 
that incorporates the miss vector and the known covariance to shape the two-dimensional conjuction plane 
ellipse and bound the maximum Pc.
Open Source
=====PAGE 182=====
Operations
173
NASA Technology Transfer Program  Software Catalog 2025-26
Software for Timeline Evaluation of Launch Logistics  
with Adaptive Rocket Refueling Requirements (STELLAR) K SC-14644
STELLAR is a Matlab application that operates on an algorithm composed of several functions capable 
of generating launch plans and scrub-turnaround plans for flight vehicles as well as providing crucial 
information regarding launch capabilities. STELLAR is capable of outputting information for up to 4 
resources at once. The inputs account for the current amount of the resource available, storage volume, and 
contractual limitations for purchasing the resource, among many others. The outputs include a Gantt chart 
timeline for the refueling or restocking of resource(s) as well as other important information listed below. 
While the tool was primarily designed for fluids (fuel, oxidizer, pressurants, etc.), it may also be used for other 
resources or payloads such as satellites, experiments, food, water, etc. 
U.S. Release Only
Space Telecommunications Radio System (STRS) Compliance Tools L EW-18562-1
These tools are used to help verify software compliance to the NASA-developed Space Telecommunications 
Radio System (STRS) architecture. The goal of STRS is to support waveform application portability and 
upgradability and reduce the cost and risks of using software-defined radios for NASA. ComplianceTool.sh 
is a Bourne shell script that tests an STRS application for the appropriate method signatures. The output is a 
Web page containing the results. The command and compliance application, WFCCN, is ported, compiled, 
and linked with an STRS infrastructure to verify static compliance such that all required STRS infrastructure-
provided methods are implemented, as well as the named constants, typedefs, and structs. WFCCN may 
also be executed for dynamic compliance testing. 
U.S. Release Only
Stol-Mode ARC-18520-1
An Emacs major mode for Spacecraft Test and Operations Language (STOL), written to be used with 
Integrated Test and Operations System (ITOS).
Open Source
STRS Flight Computer Interface (FCI) App for Core Flight System L EW-19643-1
This software implements an application that executes within the NASA core Flight System (cFS) that 
provides required STRS operating environment components using cFS and the corresponding Operating 
System Abstraction Layer (OSAL). This software utilizes the portable C/C++ STRS OE implementation 
described in a separate software package titled “Portable C/C++ STRS Operating Environment Library” 
as the basis for the fundamental STRS API calls. The combination of this interface application with the 
underlying library provide a complete STRS operating environment within the NASA Core Flight System.
U.S. Release Only
Thermal Insulation System Analysis Tool (TISTool) K SC-13561
The Thermal Insulation System Analysis Tool has been updated with more test data from the Cryogenics 
Test Laboratory and has been converted to Fortran 95 to allow for easier distribution.
U.S. Release Only
Timeline Builder Assistant (TBA) L AR-18726-1
TBA is intended to support initial surface operations planning by quickly building mission timelines with the 
“building blocks” method. The result produces a possible approach to completing all mission requirements 
and is intended for basic feasibility analysis. To build a new timeline, the user is prompted to enter the 
name of each building block and the number of times it is to be used. The program builds an extravehicular 
activity (EVA) timeline to complete science and exploration objectives while complying with current human 
spaceflight limits on the number of hours of EVA allowed per day and week. At completion, the program 
displays the timeline, number of days to complete all requirements, number of rest days, and number of 
sites visited. The database keeps a record of activities and building blocks used in all surface missions and 
is easily searchable by the user or the program.
U.S. Release Only
=====PAGE 183=====
Operations
174
NASA Technology Transfer Program  Software Catalog 2025-26
Use Cases for Flight Mechanics Analysis Tools Interoperability and Component Sharing N PO-53031-1
A NASA Engineering and Safety Center (NESC) assessment was performed to increase the interoperability 
of three specific tools: Copernicus from Johnson Space Center (JSC), the General Mission Analysis Tool 
(GMAT) from Goddard Spaceflight Flight Center (GSFC), and the Mission-Analysis Operations Navigation 
Toolkit Environment (MONTE) from the Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL). All of these tools are utilized in 
various spaceflight regimes and mission lifecycles (e.g., design, analysis, operations) to generate a variety of 
products (e.g., maneuver planning, orbit determination, error analysis, trade study, flight products). Before 
this assessment, these tools were not integrated and could not easily share data, models, or components. 
The results of the NESC assessment improved the interoperability and component sharing of these flight 
mechanic tools to increase Agency efficiency and reduce cost.
General Public Release
Web Application: Ground Hardware Management Tool K SC-13923
The Ground Systems Development and Operations (GSDO) Program requires a web-based application 
to effectively manage and coordinate the various components of ground support equipment (GSE) used 
at Kennedy Space Center (KSC) throughout the spacecraft and launch vehicle processing and integration 
flow, as well as for launch pad operations. All GSE used at KSC during the processing flow is tracked and 
identified during ground operations planning activities. The Ground Operations Planning Database (GOPDb) 
provides the application to coordinate the various aspects of the ground planning phase. Additional rigor 
and visibility into the GSE component of ground operations planning is critical to a seamless and cost 
effective planning and design phase. This integrated GSE tracking and management tool, the Ground 
Hardware Management Tool (GHMT) Application is for tracking and managing GSE data used in support of 
KSC\GSDO operations planning and launch campaigns. 
U.S. Release Only
=====PAGE 184=====
175175
Propulsion
Propellants, Cryogenics, Engine and Motor 
Performance Analysis
175175
NASA’s SLS (Space Launch System) carrying the Orion spacecraft lifts off the pad at the agency’s Kennedy Space Center 
in Florida on Nov. 16, 2022, initiating Artemis I, the first of a series of increasingly complex missions planned to establish 
a long-term human presence on the Moon. Credit: NASA
=====PAGE 185=====
Propulsion
176
NASA Technology Transfer Program  Software Catalog 2025-26
Featured Software
Chemical Equilibrium Applications (CEA) LE W-17687-1
The CEA program calculates chemical equilibrium product concentrations from any set of reactants and 
determines thermodynamic and transport properties for the product mixture. Built-in applications account 
for theoretical rocket performance, Chapman-Jouguet detonation parameters, shock-tube parameters, and 
combustion properties.
U.S. Release Only
Chemical Equilibrium with Applications in MATLAB (CEAM) MF S-33320-1
This software is an adaptation of the Fortran-based Gordon-McBride Chemical Equilibrium with Application 
computer program developed 50 years ago. It incorporates modern programming techniques and data 
management and adds unique user features. 
U.S. Release Only
ROCETS: Rocket Engine Transient Simulation Software MF S-31858-1
ROCETS software consists of a library of rocket engine component software modules for combustion 
chambers, nozzles, turbines, pumps, valves, lines, etc. The tool can be used to analyze both steady-state 
and transient performance under various operating conditions in a variety of environments.
U.S. Release Only
176
=====PAGE 186=====
Propulsion
177
NASA Technology Transfer Program  Software Catalog 2025-26
ACD Aerodynamic Design of Multistage Axial-Flow Compressors L EW-17448-1
ACD is an analysis code used for the aerodynamic design of multistage axial-flow compressors. The 
technology provides velocity diagrams on the streamlines at the blade-row edges. Blade elements are 
defined by centerline curve and thickness distribution, and blade-element inlet and outlet angles are 
established through empirical incidence and deviation-angle adjustments to the velocity diagrams. Blade 
elements can be stacked to provide the full blade design.
U.S. Release Only
ACOD Multistage Axial-Flow Compressor Off-design L EW-17449-1
A companion tool to Glenn Research Center’s ACD software, ACOD is streamline analysis code for 
predicting the off-design performance of multistage axial-flow compressors. Flow, blading, and loss are 
modeled similarly to ACD.
U.S. Release Only
Advanced Ducted Propfan Analysis Code (ADPAC) L EW-16768-1
Developed by the Allison Engine Company under contracts with Glenn Research Center, ADPAC solves 
tightly coupled internal/external flows through future-concept short-duct turbofan engines.
U.S. Release Only
Advanced Geared Turbofan 30,000lbf – Electrified (AGTF30-e)  
Dynamic Engine Model and Controller L EW-20614-1
The Advanced Geared Turbofan 30,000lbf - Electrified (AGTF30-e) is a dynamic model of a geared turbofan 
with electrification options. The model was constructed with the Toolbox for Modeling and Analysis of 
Thermodynamic Systems (T-MATS) within the MATLAB/Simulink Coding environment. It features a compact 
core and a variable area fan nozzle. The AGTF30-e has several features that can be leveraged to carryout 
numerous studies with respect to electrification. The model can represent a conventional engine or a mild 
hybrid that includes some electrified features. The model can also represent boost operation, which defines 
thrust augmentation over key mission segments. The final primary operating mode is power extraction, in 
which a significant amount of power is extracted from the engine shafts to produce thrust elsewhere on the 
airframe.
Open Source
APNASA, Average-Passage Multistage Turbomachinery Flow Field Analysis Code L EW-16855-1
APNASA simulates the three-dimensional viscous flowfield through an entire compressor or turbine 
consisting of multiple rows of blades in a single computational job. A grid is generated which 
encompasses all blade rows. The code marches forward in time on the flowfield solution within all the 
blade rows. During the process, the code periodically calculates the time-average glow in each of the 
blade rows and information required to model interaction effects between each row and its neighbors. 
When the solution converges to a user-specified tolerance, the simulation is realized, and the user obtains 
a time-average description of the flow in each blade row. Since information on blade row interactions is 
passed from row-to-row throughout the solution process, the simulation includes the time-average effects 
of neighboring blade rows on one another.
U.S. Release Only
Axial-Flow Turbine Off-Design (AXOD) Performance L EW-16323-1
AXOD computes the flow and efficiency of multistage axial-flow turbines as functions of speed and pressure 
ratio. The technology uses a span-line analysis with simple radial equilibrium. The loss model includes 
blade-row inlet losses, blade-row losses, and stage-test losses. Coefficients are selected to match the 
known design-point performance, and the internal model provides the off-design performance. 
U.S. Release Only
=====PAGE 187=====
Propulsion
178
NASA Technology Transfer Program  Software Catalog 2025-26
BLAYER LEW-16851-4
BLAYER is a Fortran program used for calculating compressible laminar and turbulent boundary layers in 
arbitrary pressure gradients.
U.S. Release Only
Broadband Fan Noise Prediction System (BFaNS) L EW-17307-1
BFaNS computes the broadband noise generated by a turbofan engine’s fan stage. Noise sources can 
include turbulence impingement and boundary-layer turbulence convection.
U.S. Release Only
Centrifugal Off-Design Performance (CCODP) Compressor L EW-17450-1
CCODP is a one-dimensional off-design performance prediction code used for centrifugal compressors. 
Correlations account for the following types of loss: inlet guide vane, impeller incidence, shock, skin friction, 
blade loading, trailing edge, clearance, vaneless and vaned diffuser friction, recirculation, and disk friction.
U.S. Release Only
Chemical Equilibrium Applications (CEA) L EW-17687-1
The CEA program calculates chemical equilibrium product concentrations from any set of reactants and 
determines thermodynamic and transport properties for the product mixture. Built-in applications account 
for theoretical rocket performance, Chapman-Jouguet detonation parameters, shock-tube parameters, and 
combustion properties.
U.S. and Foreign Release
Chemical Equilibrium with Applications in MATLAB (CEAM) M FS-33320-1
This software is an adaptation of the Fortran-based Gordon-McBride Chemical Equilibrium with Application 
computer program developed 50 years ago. It incorporates modern programming techniques and data 
management and adds unique user features. 
U.S. and Foreign Release
CMPSTK Multi-Stage Axial-Flow Compressor Off-Design L EW-17451-1
Developed for studying variable geometry effects at the conceptual design level, CMPSTK is a combination 
of the STGSTK and CMPGEN computer codes. STGSTK predicts multistage axial-flow compressor off- 
design performance using mean-line stage stacking, and CMPGEN estimates design-speed flow range  
and efficiency ratios.
U.S. Release Only
Commercial Modular Aero-Propulsion System Simulation (C-MAPSS) L EW-18315-1
Written in a combination of MATLAB and Simulink, C-MAPSS provides a realistic simulation of a large 
commercial turbofan engine. The technology includes a number of graphical user-interface screens that 
allow point-and-click operation.
U.S. Government Purpose Release
Commercial Modular Aero-Propulsion System Simulation (C-MAPSS), Version 2 L EW-18315-2
Version 2 of C-MAPSS provides a transient simulation of a large commercial turbofan engine with a 
realistic engine control system. Written in a combination of MATLAB and Simulink, the software supports 
easy access to health, control, and engine parameters through a graphical user interface. Retaining the 
convenience and user-friendliness of the original, Version 2 includes three actuators (as compared to one) 
and offers an improved controller, as well as added actuator and sensor dynamics.
U.S. Government Purpose Release
=====PAGE 188=====
Propulsion
179
NASA Technology Transfer Program  Software Catalog 2025-26
Commercial Modular Aero-Propulsion System Simulation 40k (C-MAPSS40k) L EW-18624-1
Developed in the MATLAB/Simulink environment, C-MAPSS40k is a high-fidelity transient simulation of a 
generic commercial turbofan engine with a 40,000-pound thrust. The nonlinear physics-based component-
level model operates up to Mach 0.8 over a wide ambient temperature range and executes faster than real 
time. The model can be run from the command line or by using a graphical user interface.
U.S. Government Purpose Release
Comprehensive C++ Controller  
for a Magnetically Supported Vertical Rotor, Version 1.0 L EW-17293-1
FATMaCC (Five-Axis, Three-Magnetic-Bearing Control Code), is a versatile code that possesses many 
desirable features that were not available in previous in-house controllers. Using a 1-GHz processor, the 
software controls a five-axis system in either a decentralized or a more elegant centralized (model control) 
mode at a loop time of 56 s. In addition, it levitates and controls (with only minor modification to the input-
output wiring) a two-axis and/or a four-axis system.
U.S. Release Only
Compressible Flow Toolbox L EW-17898-1
The Compressible Flow Toolbox is a set of algorithms that solve classical compressible equations for 
isentropic flow, fanno flow, Rayleigh flow, normal shock, oblique shock, and expansion. Implemented in the 
MATLAB programming language, the technology can be used in the analysis of one-dimensional steady 
flow with constant entropy, with friction, with heat transfer, or with supersonic Mach numbers.
U.S. Release Only
Computational Fluid Dynamics (CFD) Seal Analysis Code L EW-16582-1
This technology is a computer program designed for the study of fluid dynamic forces.
U.S. Release Only
Computed Tomography Cylinder Unwrapper/Re-slicer Software (CT-CURS), Version 2 L EW-19031-1
CT-CURS is a dedicated unwrapping/re-slicing software tool for computing tomography data from 
cylindrical and partially cylindrical structures. The technology can be used as a complement to vendor 
software or can be utilized as a completely standalone visualization program.
U.S. Release Only
CORBASec LEW-17214-1
This technology has been used for distributed aerospace propulsion simulations.
U.S. Release Only
Cryogen Storage Integrated Model (CryoSIM) M FS-33071-1
CryoSIM provides input power and dry mass estimates for insulation and hardware used in in-space 
applications to maintain cryogens in storage. System heat load estimations and associated propellant loss 
masses can also be generated.
U.S. Government Purpose Release
=====PAGE 189=====
Propulsion
180
NASA Technology Transfer Program  Software Catalog 2025-26
Cryogenic Flow Boiling in Heated Tubes Code Infrastructure for Thermal Desktop L EW-20560-1
To enable the design of future in-space cryogenic propellant vehicles such as Lunar and Martian ascent 
and descent stages and the nuclear thermal propulsion system, high accuracy models of various phases 
of the propellant transfer process are required. This NTR focuses on modeling and development of new 
code infrastructure of steady state flow boiling through the transfer line that connects a propellant tank to an 
engine or customer receiver tank, which is required to set limits on the allowable heat flux into the line. This 
NTR covers the individual flow boiling correlations along with the logic and methodology for patching the 
correlations together to produce a single continuous boiling curve in a user-defined subroutine. In turn, the 
subroutine can be called by higher order lumped capacitance codes such as Thermal Desktop.
U.S. Release Only
CSPAN Axial-Flow Compressor Conceptual Design Code L EW-16074-1
This span-line analysis technology uses isentropic simple radial equilibrium to determine a flow path.
U.S. Government Purpose Release
EADIN Communication Protocol L EW-19264-1
This communication protocol allows microcontrollers to talk to each other in a structured fashion. As such, it 
is embodied in C++ code that runs on the microcontroller. The software is not mission certified and is being 
used for demonstration and testing purposes only. 
Open Source
Generalized Fluid System Simulation Program (GFSSP), Version 701 M FS-33019-1
The Generalized Fluid System Simulation Program (GFSSP) is a general software tool that can perform 
complex fluid flow analysis in a wide variety of applications, including those related to chemical processing, 
gas processing, power plants, hydraulic control circuits, and various kinds of fluid distribution systems. The 
tool models liquid fuel phase changes that include compressibility and mixture thermodynamics and allows 
the user to apply and vary “what-if” effects of external influences.
U.S. Government Purpose Release
Generalized Fluid System Simulation Program (GFSSP), Version 701  
(Educational Version) MF S-32929-1
The Generalized Fluid System Simulation Program (GFSSP) is a general software tool that can perform 
complex fluid flow analysis in a wide variety of applications, including those related to chemical 
processing, gas processing, power plants, hydraulic control circuits, and various kinds of fluid distribution 
systems. Example problems can be used effectively as a teaching aid to students as part of their senior 
undergraduate or graduate coursework.
U.S. Release Only
ML_POGO Stability Analysis Software M FS-33024-1
This technology models the coupled structural/propulsion (pogo) stability of a liquid-propellant rocket.
U.S. Release Only
Modular Aero-Propulsion System Simulation (MAPSS) L EW-17674-1
MAPSS is a flexible turbofan engine simulation environment that provides easy access to health, control, 
and engine parameters through a graphical user interface. The technology can be used as a simulation 
environment for developing and testing advanced control algorithms, or it can run transient simulations or 
generate state-space linear models for creating a piecewise linear controller.
U.S. Release Only
=====PAGE 190=====
Propulsion
181
NASA Technology Transfer Program  Software Catalog 2025-26
Multidimensional, Multiphysics Computational  
Heat Transfer Analysis Software (UNIC) M FS-32554-1
The Multidemensional, Multiphysics Computational Heat Transfer Analysis Software (UNIC) solves transient, 
coupled, and simultaneous conjugate heat transfer solutions commonly encountered in rocket engine and 
launch vehicle component design and analysis.
U.S. Release Only
NDAS (NASA Data Acquisition System) S SC-00592
NASA Data Acquisiton System (NDAS) encompasses a suite of Data Acquisition Applications including 
acquisition, data processing, calibration, display, recording as well as distribution. This software system is 
intended to be used across all data acquisition hardware platforms.
U.S. Government Purpose Release
ROCETS: Rocket Engine Transient Simulation Software M FS-31858-1
ROCETS software consists of a library of rocket engine component software modules for combustion 
chambers, nozzles, turbines, pumps, valves, lines, etc. The tool can be used to analyze both steady-state 
and transient performance under various operating conditions in a variety of environments.
U.S. Release Only
Simple Model for Rotating Detonation Rocket Engine Sizing  
and Performance Estimates L EW-20423-1
Two implementations of this model are provided. The first implementation is a Visual Basic computer code 
that resides as a macro for execution in a Microsoft Excel Spreadsheet. The spreadsheet is the interface for 
the code where required inputs may be supplied and outputs are recorded. The alternate implementation is 
a MATLAB code. The MATLAB implementation includes a user interface and the MATLAB subroutines that 
perform the RDRE calculations. The result is a RDRE simulation that runs on a personal computer and can 
deliver reasonable estimates of engine performance, size, and flow rate for a given notional application. This 
in turn allows preliminary assessment of RDRE benefits for various missions.
U.S. Release Only
SNAP, Version 2.3 L EW-17816-1
SNAP is an N-body high-fidelity propagation program that can model the trajectories of the planets, the 
Sun, and virtually any natural satellite in the solar system.
U.S. Release Only
STAN5 LEW-13009-1
This computer program computes general two-dimensional turbulent boundary-layer flow using finite 
difference techniques. Without requiring any modifications to the program code, STAN 5 can handle a wide 
range of boundary-layer problems. The technology has been used extensively at Stanford University.
U.S. Release Only
SUPIN: Supersonic Inlet Design and Analysis Tool L EW-20136-1
SUPIN performs design and analysis of axisymmetric pitot, three-dimensional pitot, axisymmetric-spike, 
two-dimensional, and streamline-traced inlets using an input data file consisting of input factors. SUPIN 
writes an output data file containing inlet performance metrics and geometric data. The inlet performance 
metrics calculated include the flow rates, total pressure recovery, and drag. SUPIN can create the 
surface grids for the inlets that may be used to visualize the inlet geometry and generate volume grids for 
computational fluid dynamics (CFD) simulations. SUPIN can also automatically generate three-dimensional, 
multi-block structured grids for CFD simulations.
U.S. Release Only
=====PAGE 191=====
Propulsion
182
NASA Technology Transfer Program  Software Catalog 2025-26
Three-Dimensional Nozzle Design Code L EW-20180-1
This program uses the three-dimensional method of characteristics and streamline-tracing techniques to 
develop complex nozzle expansion surfaces. It is intended to facilitate integration of a high-speed vehicle 
aft-body with its propulsive flowpath.
Open Source
Toolbox for the Modeling and Analysis of Thermodynamic Systems (T-MATS) L EW-19165-1
T-MATS is a Simulink toolbox intended for use in the modeling and simulation of thermodynamic systems 
and their controls. It contains generic thermodynamic and controls components that may be combined with 
a variable input iterative solver and optimization algorithm to create complex systems to meet the needs of a 
developer. Development of this tool was completed on behalf of the NASA Aviation Safety Program’s Vehicle 
Systems Safety Technologies (VSST) project located at the Glenn Research Center. 
Open Source
TURBAN Turbomachine Design Code L EW-17454-1
TURBAN analysis is performed at the arithmetic mean diameter. The stage velocity diagrams are either all 
similar (therefore have the same work factor) or are determined from an input stage work split. All stages 
have the same stator exit angle. Stage-by-stage tailoring of the velocity diagrams is not allowed.
U.S. Release Only
Upgrades to OpenNCC L EW-20413-1
New features added to code addressing combustor cooling and combustor-turbine coupled simulations. 
The new features included high-order CFD method for large eddy simulations (LES), improved overset mesh 
interface, vastly improved sliding mesh interface.
U.S. Release Only
V072 Rotor Wake/Stator Interaction Noise Prediction L EW-17065-1
The V072 computer code predicts noise from rotor wake/stator interactions. The technology can perform 
compressor rotor wake prediction only, rotor/stator or fan/FEGV interaction only, fan/core stator interaction 
only, and both fan/FEGV and fan/core stator interactions.
U.S. Release Only
WOBBLE LEW-17325-1
This technology computes the tone noise associated with propellers and predicts axial and circumferential 
directivity. The acoustic model is exact and accounts for all unsteady sources.
U.S. Release Only
=====PAGE 192=====
183183
Structures  
and Mechanisms
Deployables, Structural Loading  
Analysis and Design 
183183
In January of 2021, NASA spacewalker and Expedition 64 flight engineer Victor Glover works to ready the International 
Space Station’s port-side truss structure for future solar array upgrades. Credit: NASA
=====PAGE 193=====
Structures and Mechanisms
184
NASA Technology Transfer Program  Software Catalog 2025-26
Featured Software
VLOADS: Launch Vehicle Loads Analysis for Preliminary Design, Version 1.4 MF S-27332-1
The VLOADS program calculates launch vehicles’ in-flight structural loads for preliminary design. The program 
may also be used to calculate structural loads for upper stages and planetary transfer vehicles. Launch vehicle 
information and input data such as aerodynamic coefficients, mass properties, propellants, engine thrusts, 
and performance data are compiled and analyzed by VLOADS to produce distributed shear loads, bending 
moments, axial forces, and vehicle line loads as a function of X-station along the vehicle’s length. Translational 
accelerations and interface loads, if the launch vehicle has boosters or wings, are also computed.
General Public Release
Data Transfer Between Dissimilar Meshes (DTBDM), Version 2.0 LA R-16371-1
Designed to automate an otherwise labor-intensive process, DTBDM puts the aerodynamic loads output of 
a computational fluid dynamics (CFD) package into the structural model of an aircraft to allow for deflection 
calculations.
U.S. Release Only
Half-Cycle Crack Growth DR C-010-044
This NASA-developed software program predicts the operational flight life of critical aero-structural 
components. The tool offers a reliable method for calculating theoretical fatigue crack growths that could 
lead to catastrophic structural component failures. The program builds upon and integrates Armstrong 
Flight Research Center’s proven half-cycle and closed-form aging theories and is especially accurate 
because it considers every half-cycle of loading spectra for specific structural components. The program 
works by reading test data files and determining maximum and minimum loads of each half-cycle of 
random loading spectra in order to calculate theoretical crack growth. The innovation is an improvement on 
traditional prediction software (and in particular on visual inspections) because it considers mini-amplitude 
stress loading and half-cycles based on the duty cycle of a particular component or structure.
General Public Release
184
=====PAGE 194=====
Structures and Mechanisms
185
NASA Technology Transfer Program  Software Catalog 2025-26
CCGEOM LEW-17450-1A
CCGEOM is a Fortran computer code developed to facilitate the rapid generation of flow passage and 
blading for various turbomachinery components.
U.S. Release Only
Data Transfer Between Dissimilar Meshes (DTBDM), Version 2.0 L AR-16371-1
Designed to automate an otherwise labor-intensive process, DTBDM puts the aerodynamic loads output of 
a computational fluid dynamics (CFD) package into the structural model of an aircraft to allow for deflection 
calculations.
U.S. Release Only
Equivalent Plate Structural Modeling (EPSM) Computer Program L AR-20075-1
The Equivalent Plate Structural Modeling (EPSM) computer program analyzes wing-like structures using 
high-order Legendre polynomials to define displacement systems. The wing, tail and fin components are 
attached to each other, or to ground, using stiff springs or rigid links. Static and vibration analyses may 
be performed, and stress, static displacement, vibration frequencies and vibration modes may be written 
to files or exported for plotting. Constraints and their sensitivity derivatives may also be computed for 
subsequent use in structural optimization.
General Public Release
Femera LAR-19531-1
An open-source finite element Mini-App, developed under LaRC’s High Performance Computing Incubator 
(HPCI), that updates the element-by-element (EBE) matrix-free method for modern HPC architectures. This 
Mini-App isolates EBE iteration kernels, with tests for correctness and performance, for use across a wide 
range of problem sizes and HPC architectures. 
Open Source
Half-Cycle Crack Growth D RC-010-044
This NASA-developed software program predicts the operational flight life of critical aero-structural 
components. The tool offers a reliable method for calculating theoretical fatigue crack growths that could 
lead to catastrophic structural component failures. The program builds upon and integrates Armstrong 
Flight Research Center’s proven half-cycle and closed-form aging theories and is especially accurate 
because it considers every half-cycle of loading spectra for specific structural components. The program 
works by reading test data files and determining maximum and minimum loads of each half-cycle of 
random loading spectra in order to calculate theoretical crack growth. The innovation is an improvement on 
traditional prediction software (and in particular on visual inspections) because it considers mini-amplitude 
stress loading and half-cycles based on the duty cycle of a particular component or structure.
General Public Release
HCDstruct LAR-18313-1
This MATLAB routine generates a scalable finite element model suitable for hybrid wing-body (HWB) structural 
analysis and optimization. HWB geometry structure is based on a vehicle sketch-pad (VSP) surface model of 
an aircraft and a FLOPS-compatible parameterization of the center body and wing structure. Optimization and 
weight calculation are based on a Nastran finite element analysis of the primary structural components.
U.S. Release Only
=====PAGE 195=====
Structures and Mechanisms
186
NASA Technology Transfer Program  Software Catalog 2025-26
Loft: An Automated Mesh Generator for Stiffened Shell Aerospace Vehicles L AR-18704-1
Loft is an automated mesh generation code that is designed for aerospace vehicle structures. From user 
input, Loft generates meshes for wings, noses, tanks, fuselage sections, thrust structures, and so on. As 
a mesh is generated, each element is assigned properties to mark the part of the vehicle with which it is 
associated. This property assignment is an extremely powerful feature that enables detailed analysis tasks, 
such as load application and structural sizing.
General Public Release
Monocoque Tank Analysis Spreadsheet System (MonTASS), Version 2.0 M FS-31223-1
The Monocoque Tank Analysis Spreadsheet System (MonTASS) computer program enables rapid analysis  
and preliminary design of structural domes and truncated sections of cones. MonTASS performs both 
design and analysis functions and can be used to analyze nonpressurized conical structures.
U.S. Release Only
NASATrussOpt: Software for Truss Structure Optimization  
Considering Member and Joint Strength, Buckling, and Nested Truss Configurations L AR-20469-1
TrussOpt23 is a research code that is used to develop and test augmentations to existing 2D truss structure 
optimization algorithms to add consideration for stability, joint strength, and dynamic load cases. The end 
goals are manufacturable truss designs relevant to spacecraft and lunar infrastructure applications. 
U.S. Release Only
Object-Oriented Optimization Tool, Version 2.0 D RC-014-024
This multidisciplinary design analysis and optimization solution automates optimization tasks early in the 
design process according to a range of user-defined parameters, including factors such as cost, safety, 
and environmental impact. The tool provides a framework that enables several engineers to use multiple 
programs to globally optimize a model. This tool quickly streamlines optimization and design tasks by 
integrating disparate software packages – NASTRAN, ZAERO, Cart3D, FUN3D, MOMAT, etc. – in a cross-
platform network environment. Designers can convert design variables to structural parameters and 
generate objective functions using either the built-in pre/post-processor or their own analyzer. 
General Public Release
PanNDE LAR-19800-1
This disclosure describes software and its framework for physics-based simulation of nondestructive 
evaluation (NDE). The software is comprised of core plugin interfaces for mesh formats, simulation 
metadata, and simulation results. This is paired with an implementation of an ultrasound inspection model 
as a demonstration case. The plugin software architecture allows for independent developability and testing 
of sub-modules for improved reliability and improved software validation & verification. The aim is to open-
source the code to provide a vehicle for collaborative development by the Computational NDE community. 
The current software is a new implementation of the Ultrasound Simulation Code for 3D Curved Fiber 
Reinforced Composite Laminates.
Open Source
=====PAGE 196=====
Structures and Mechanisms
187
NASA Technology Transfer Program  Software Catalog 2025-26
RANSTEP: Reduced Order Analysis Using a Nonlinear STiffness Evaluation Procedure L AR-17262-1
A new implementation of reduced order finite-element-based analysis for solving geometrically nonlinear 
random vibration problems of complex structures has been developed. The implementation is given the 
acronym RANSTEP for Reduced Order Analysis using a Nonlinear STiffness Evaluation Procedure. The 
nonlinear stiffness evaluation procedure allows computation of otherwise inaccessible modal nonlinear 
stiffness terms from commercial finite element programs. Some operations are performed outside the 
commercial codes and utilize in-house-developed Fortran codes. Additionally, Direct Matrix Abstraction 
Program (DMAP) alters and Python scripts are used to facilitate implementations written about MSC.
NASTRAN and ABAQUS, respectively. Two solutions procedures of different fidelity and computational 
cost are offered in each implementation. They are equivalent linearization and time numerical simulation. 
Aerospace uses include aircraft and spacecraft structural analysis.
U.S. Release Only
ScIFEN Solver Mini-App (HPCI) L AR-19417-1
This technology is a stripped-down version of a previously released code (ScIFEN) that creates an open-
source mini-app for LaRC’s High-Performance Computing Incubator (HPCI). The app isolates the linear 
solver that ScIFEN uses and loads an example system from file as a test case. It represents roughly 1%  
of the total source code.
Open Source
Software Platform for Post-Processing Waveform-Based NDE, Version 2.0 L EW-18460-1
This software platform is for post-processing Waveform-based NDE.
U.S. Release Only
Stochastic Reduced Order Models with Python (SROMPy)  L AR-19359-1
The SROMPy software package is a code written in Python to help solve uncertainty quantification 
and propagation problems. Stochastic Reduced Order Models (SROMs) are low-dimensional, discrete 
representations of a given random vector being modeled that facilitate efficient stochastic calculations. 
SROMs can be viewed as a smart Monte Carlo method. Using the concept for uncertainty propagation is 
similarly straightforward, but can significantly reduce computation time.
Open Source
Structure Deformation Calculation Program  
based on Ko Displacement Transfer Functions D RC-013-035
A computer program that will calculate slopes, deflections, and cross-sectional twist angles if applicable 
at strain-sensing stations on any structures based on the Ko Displacement Transfer Functions. The 
program uses measured surface bending strains obtained at strain-sensing stations and structure 
geometrical properties as its inputs. The program will output time history slopes, deflections, maximum 
deflections, and cross-sectional twist angles if applicable, and depth factors if calculated. The calculated 
deflections of a structure can be studied and analyzed for monitoring the health of a structure to prevent 
catastrophic events.
General Public Release
TetherCAD: A Python Library to Aid in Systems Engineering for Tether Designs N PO-53032-1
TetherCAD is a set of analysis tools to aid in the design of electromechanical tethers. These tethers can be 
used for robotics, space systems and more! The tool set is presented as a python library to promote ease-
of-use and allow compatibility with a number of different systems. This library aims to help the user quickly 
and concisely answer the high-level questions involved in a tether’s or tethered-system’s design.
General Public Release
=====PAGE 197=====
Structures and Mechanisms
188
NASA Technology Transfer Program  Software Catalog 2025-26
Tool for Generation of MAC/GMC Representative Unit Cell for CMC/PMC Analysis L EW-19522-1
This is a GUI-based tool that generates a number of different user-defined repeating unit cells (RUCs) 
interactively that can be used in conjunction with MAC GMC and HF GMC, composite micromechanics-
based analysis tools. In addition, the code has provisions for generation of a MAC/GMC-compatible input 
text file that can be merged with any MAC/GMC input file tailored to analyze composite materials. Although 
the primary intention was to address the three different constituents and phases that are usually present in 
CMCs (fibers, matrix, and interphase), the software can be easily modified to address two-phase polymer 
matrix composite (PMC) materials where an interphase is absent. 
U.S. Release Only
VLOADS: Launch Vehicle Loads Analysis for Preliminary Design, Version 1.4 M FS-27332-1
The VLOADS program calculates launch vehicles’ in-flight structural loads for preliminary design. The program 
may also be used to calculate structural loads for upper stages and planetary transfer vehicles. Launch vehicle 
information and input data such as aerodynamic coefficients, mass properties, propellants, engine thrusts, 
and performance data are compiled and analyzed by VLOADS to produce distributed shear loads, bending 
moments, axial forces, and vehicle line loads as a function of X-station along the vehicle’s length. Translational 
accelerations and interface loads, if the launch vehicle has boosters or wings, are also computed.
U.S. Release Only
=====PAGE 198=====
189189
System Testing
Acoustics, Shock, Vibration, Thermal Vacuum,  
Leak and Pressure Testing, Test Criteria, Test 
Management and Planning, Aerodynamic Testing 
189189
The Landing and Recovery team of NASA’s Exploration Ground System and partners from the Department of Defense 
aboard the USS San Diego recover the Crew Module Test Article, pulling it into the ship’s well deck during a recovery test 
off the coast of San Diego in February of 2024. Credit: NASA
=====PAGE 199=====
190
System Testing
NASA Technology Transfer Program  Software Catalog 2025-26
Featured Software
System Identification Programs for Aircraft (SIDPAC) LA R-16100-1
Written in MATLAB, SIDPAC is a collection of over 300 programs that perform a wide variety of tasks 
related to system identification applied to aircraft. SIDPAC includes tools for experiment design, data 
analysis, kinematic consistency checking, static and dynamic modeling, simulation, numerical integration 
and differentiation, smoothing, filtering, finite Fourier transformation, statistical modeling and evaluation, 
optimization, parameter estimation, model accuracy quantification, model validation, and more.
U.S. and Foreign Release
LEWICE 3.2.3 Ice Accretion Software LE W-18573-1
LEWICE contains an analytical ice accretion model that evaluates the freezing process thermodynamics 
that occur when super-cooled droplets impinge on a body. Both atmospheric parameters (i.e., temperature, 
pressure, and velocity) and meteorological parameters (i.e., liquid water content, droplet diameter, and 
relative humidity) are used to determine the shape of the ice accretion.
U.S. Release Only
TCGRID v.400 LE W-17635-1
TCGRID is a three-dimensional grid-generation code for turbo-machinery blades. The software can 
generate single- or multi-block grids that are compatible with several computational fluid dynamics (CFD) 
analysis codes, including SWIFT and ADPAC.
U.S. Release Only
190
=====PAGE 200=====
191
System Testing
NASA Technology Transfer Program  Software Catalog 2025-26
Acoustic Propagation and Emulation Toolset (APET) L AR-17761-1
The Acoustic Propagation and Emulation Toolset (APET) is a framework code uniting several acoustic 
methodologies for the propagation and measurement of source noise audibility at farfield observers, 
accounting for the effects of the atmosphere, weather, terrain, and spherical spreading. Currently, APET 
consists of a modified version of the Rotorcraft Noise Model (RNM, Version 7) coupled with the newly 
developed Spectral Attenuation Method (SAM) that contains the Ray Tracing Program (RTP) and two 
versions of a Greens Function Parabolic Equation (GFPE) code. A third component of APET is an audibility 
prediction scheme based on the work of Abrahamson, initially called ICHIN (I Can Hear It Now) and further 
developed by Wyle Labs as AUDIB.
U.S. Release Only
Advanced Acoustic Model, Version 2 (AAM2) L AR-19004-1
AAM is a computer program that calculates community noise from aircraft flight operations. It is a simulation 
model computing time histories of noise for arbitrary vehicle flight operations. The model can accommodate 
multiple noise sources (rotors, engines, airframe, etc.), each represented by a sphere of spectral data at a 
reference distance. Propagation to the ground accounts for spherical spreading, atmospheric absorption, 
ground impedance effects, and weather effects. Spectral levels and a variety of community noise metrics 
are computed and can be plotted on a flat ground or non-flat terrain.
U.S. Government Purpose Release
Advanced Subsonic and Supersonic Propeller Induced Noise  
(ASSPIN) Prediction Program L AR-17590-1
ASSPIN is a computer program that predicts the noise generated by propellers operating at subsonic, 
transonic, or supersonic helical tip speeds in either single-rotation or counter-rotation mode. The format of 
blade surface pressure data obtained from aerodynamic codes for ASSPIN input is generally not compatible 
with that required by ASSPIN. The ASP_Tools suite provides the capability to manipulate blade geometry 
and surface pressure data to produce proper ASSPIN input. In addition, the ability to parse ASSPIN output 
files and obtain specific output variables is provided.
U.S. Release Only
AirShow 1.1.1 L EW-17228-1
The AirShow software package enables 3D visualization of computational meshes and computed flow-field 
data associated with computational fluid dynamics (CFD). The program displays structured grid blocks and 
computational grid planes.
U.S. Release Only
Arbitrary Accuracy Nonlinear Euler Solver L EW-17465-1
This NASA-developed code is the first in the world to solve the nonlinear Euler equations to at least 
15th-order accuracy in space and time in two dimensions. It is capable of even higher order accuracy if 
sufficient computer precision is available.
U.S. Release Only
Automated Camera Calibration Software (ACCS) N PO-41312-1
Using collected metrology data, the ACCS system significantly increases the efficiency of the entire camera 
calibration process, resulting in reduced costs and turnaround time. Even in extreme conditions, the tool 
performs calibrations with minimal user input.
U.S. Government Purpose Release
=====PAGE 201=====
192
System Testing
NASA Technology Transfer Program  Software Catalog 2025-26
CARES/LIFE LEW-16018-1
This NASA software was developed to predict the reliability and life of structures made from advanced 
ceramics and other brittle materials (e.g., glass, graphite, and intermetallics).
U.S. Release Only
Centrifugal Compressor Design (CCD) Code L EW-17452-1
This NASA-developed technology provides a rapid preliminary assessment of the design geometry and the 
design-point performance of centrifugal compressors. The analysis is based on a one-dimensional flow 
model with correlations for the following losses: inlet guide vane, rotor inlet shock, incidence, clearance, 
blade loading, skin friction, disk friction, recirculation, vaneless diffuser skin friction, and vaned diffuser.  
With input performance, the code can operate in design mode; with input geometry, the code can operate  
in analysis mode.
U.S. Release Only
Channel Emulator L EW-19351-1
The Channel Emulator (CE) is a software-based network testing tool. Its primary functions include providing 
data framing services, acting as a flexible protocol gateway, and providing network emulation capabilities.
Open Source
Coupled Structural, Thermal, Acoustic, Electromagnetic (CSTEM) Analysis L EW-17052-1
CSTEM is a UNIX executable for coupled structural, thermal, acoustic, and electromagnetic analysis and 
optimization.
U.S. Release Only
Defect Detection and Prevention (DDP) N PO-20741-1
DDP evaluates criticality by generating a tree of failure modes and a tree of requirements and then evaluating 
the impact of each failure mode on each requirement.
U.S. Government Purpose Release
DDS.js: Design Patterns and Methods to Rapidly Develop Web and Mobile  
Applications Integrated with Systems Utilizing the Object Management Group’s  
(OMG) Data Distribution Service (DDS) K SC-13925
DDS.js gives Node.js application developers the ability to integrate with a DDS-enabled software system 
without having to write the extension software that would otherwise be required. It achieves this feature by 
processing the system’s already existing (or otherwise necessary on a new system) IDL files and generating 
the appropriate C++ code based on the IDL file contents. In doing so, the solution includes a novel way of 
using C++ templates and advanced generic programming techniques to produce data transcoders between 
JavaScript and C++ that preserve all data characteristics as described in the system’s IDL files with no need 
for application developers to expend work implementing or customizing this transcoding.
Open Source
Fan Broadband Noise Prediction Code L EW-17279-1
This NASA-developed technology predicts the dipole and quadruple noise that results from the interaction 
of anisotropic homogeneous turbulence with a rotor or stator.
U.S. Release Only
=====PAGE 202=====
193
System Testing
NASA Technology Transfer Program  Software Catalog 2025-26
Fast Scattering Code (FSC), Versions 3.1 and 3.2 L AR-17828-1
The Fast Scattering Code (FSC) is a computer program designed to predict the scattered acoustic field 
that results from the interaction between a known incident sound and arbitrary three-dimensional surfaces 
immersed in a potential background flow. The technology is based on the equations of time-harmonic, 
linearized acoustics and employs equivalent sources for solving an exterior Helmholtz equation boundary 
value problem (BVP). The incident sound can be generated by the FSC using a collection of simple 
point multipoles (monopoles and dipoles), or it can be provided by the user from other prediction codes. 
Predictions for high-frequency/large-scale combinations yield linear systems with millions of unknowns 
and memory requirements beyond the capabilities of most advanced computer systems to date. The 
computational engine of the FSC has been totally redesigned to alleviate the frequency limitations of the 
code by employing numerical algorithms that drastically reduce computer resource utilization and take 
advantage of multiprocessor platforms.
U.S. Release Only
Formal Interactive Verification Environment for the Plan Execution  
Interchange Language (PLEXIL5)  L AR-19339-1
PLEXIL is an open-source synchronous language developed by NASA for commanding and monitoring 
autonomous systems. PLEXIL5 is a tool that implements the formal executable semantics of PLEXIL. PLEXIL5 
includes a graphical interface that enables access to formal verification techniques such as model-checking, 
symbolic execution, theorem proving, and static analysis of plans. The graphical environment supports formula 
editing and visualization of counter examples, interactive simulation of plans at different granularity levels, and 
random initialization of external environment variables.
Open Source
GRAPE.107 LEW-16851-1
GRAPE is a two-dimensional elliptic grid generation code to be used with isolated airfoils. This modified 
version of the software (with application for turbomachinery blades) can generate grids for the RVCQ3D 
turbo-machinery analysis code.
U.S. Release Only
HemoDose Software, Version 2.0 M SC-26186-1
HemoDose estimates the absorbed dose of radiation in adults by using single or serial counts of granulocytes, 
lymphocytes, leukocytes, or platelets after exposure. 
General Public Release
High-Speed Data Viewer M FS-31700-1
The High-Speed Data Viewer computer software was developed for viewing high-frequency data recorded 
in the East and West Test Areas at Marshall Space Flight Center (MSFC).Features include: Amplitude vs. 
Time Plots with full zoom capabilities; Frequency Component Plot at specified time interval; Waterfall Plots/
Frequency Intensity Plots display changing frequency components over a duration of time; print options for 
plots; export functions save plot data as text files for importing into other applications. This software allows 
the user to plot data in time domain and view frequency components in multiple ways.
U.S. Release Only
IceVal DatAssistant L EW-18343-1
This NASA-developed technology provides an improved mechanism for managing the large volume of data 
generated and utilized in performing icing research.
U.S. Release Only
=====PAGE 203=====
194
System Testing
NASA Technology Transfer Program  Software Catalog 2025-26
Jet Noise Prediction Code (JeNo) L EW-18199-1
JeNo is a Fortran 90 computer code that calculates the far-field sound spectral density produced by 
axisymmetric jets at user-specified observer locations and frequency ranges. The user must provide a 
structured computational grid and also input a mean flow solution from a Reynolds-Averaged Navier Stokes 
(RANS).
U.S. Release Only
Jet Noise Prediction Code (JeNo 2.5D) L EW-18199-2
JeNo is a Fortran 90 computer code that evaluates the far-field turbulence-generated noise in 
non-axisymmetric jets. The propagation Green’s function is calculated along a user-specified azimuthal 
angle (line of sight), but source volume integration is carried out in 3D. The user must provide a structured 
computational grid in a polar coordinate system and also input a mean flow solution from a Reynolds-
averaged Navier Stokes (RANS).
U.S. Release Only
JPF-NAS: An Extension of Java Pathfinder Supporting  
Model-Checking Distributed Systems A RC-17301-1
JPF-NAS is implemented as a JPF extension that models interprocess communication mechanisms. It 
uses a form of partial-order reduction to explore all possible executions of a distributed Java application. 
JPF-NAS provides the functionality to check a given distributed application under test against possible 
network failures that can occur at the operating system or the hardware layer.
Open Source
LEWICE 3.2.3 Ice Accretion Software L EW-18573-1
LEWICE contains an analytical ice accretion model that evaluates the freezing process thermodynamics 
that occur when super-cooled droplets impinge on a body. Both atmospheric parameters (i.e., temperature, 
pressure, and velocity) and meteorological parameters (i.e., liquid water content, droplet diameter, and 
relative humidity) are used to determine the shape of the ice accretion.
U.S. Release Only
LINFLUX: 3D Linearized Unsteady Aerodynamic Analysis L EW-17346-1
LINFLUX is a three-dimensional, linearized, unsteady aerodynamic analysis (and code) that can be used to 
predict the aero-acoustic/aero-elastic responses of axial-flow turbo-machinery blade rows to aerodynamic/
structural excitations.
U.S. Release Only
MERIDLN LEW-16369-1
MERIDLN is a Fortran program for calculating velocities/streamlines of axial-, radial-, or mixed-flow turbo-
machinery or annular ducts on the hub-shroud mid-channel stream surface.
U.S. Release Only
=====PAGE 204=====
195
System Testing
NASA Technology Transfer Program  Software Catalog 2025-26
MESA: MEssage-based System Analysis  A RC-18229-1
MESA is a framework that provides runtime verification of large distributed systems in a nonintrusive 
manner. It checks a trace of the system under test against properties of interest, and if a property is 
violated, it issues an error along with a counter example. A trace is a sequence of messages entailing 
information about a run of the system. MESA leverages RACE, which is a platform for instantiating and 
running highly concurrent and distributed systems, to provide connectivity to and retrieve information from 
the system under test. Using existing domain specific languages, TraceContrance and Daut, It allows for 
formal specification of properties in state machines and linear temporal logic formulas. MESA is written in 
Scala, and employs the actor programming model, as implemented in the Akka framework. Finally, using 
asynchronous communicating actors to capture properties of interest, it allows for decentralized monitoring 
of the system.
Open Source
Metrics Library for Prognostics Performance Evaluation A RC-17898-1
A suite of algorithms implemented in MATLAB for evaluating the performance of prognostics algorithms that 
predict the remaining useful life (RUL) of engineering systems. It includes alpha-lambda, beta metrics that 
compare the ground truth RUL against continuous predictions; these predictions can either be point-value 
or be a probability distribution that depicts the uncertainty regarding the prediction of RUL. The library can 
be used for a variety of applications and performs different types of evaluations depending upon how the 
ground truth and the predictions are available. 
Open Source
 
MGBK Jet Noise Prediction Code L EW-17062-1
The physics-based MGBK code predicts subsonic and low-supersonic jet mixing noise and shock noise. 
Predictions are in the form of far-field sound pressure level (SPL) and frequency spectra on an arc or a sideline.
U.S. Release Only
Multiple Kernel Anomaly Detection (MKAD) Algorithm A RC-16462-1
In offline mode, MKAD performs automated anomaly detection on large heterogeneous data sets that 
contain both discrete symbols and continuous data streams.
Open Source
Multiple Pure Tone (MPT) Noise Code L EW-17386-1
The MPT noise prediction procedure is based on uniform-rotor computational fluid dynamics (CFD) analysis 
of BPF tonal content in conjunction with engineering (statistical) correlation information of blade-to-blade 
non-uniformity effects.
U.S. Release Only
NASA Auralization Framework (NAF) L AR-18541-1
NAF is an open architecture for auralization components. It is structured as a set of common building blocks 
in the form of dynamically linked libraries and will serve as the basis for future auralization capabilities. 
Libraries for each of the following are provided as part of the framework: the core, Pathfinder, scene 
generator, synthesis, signal processing, and scheduling. Each library contains a usable but simple set of 
capabilities. 
General Public Release
NASA Auralization Framework Advanced Plugin Libraries (NAF APL) L AR-19278-1
NAF is an open architecture for auralization components. It is structured as a set of common building blocks 
in the form of dynamically linked libraries. Each library contains a usable but simple set of capabilities. The 
NAF APL provides additional means for source noise synthesis, propagation effects, and interfaces  
to NASA’s Aircraft Noise Prediction Program 2 (ANOPP2).
General Public Release
=====PAGE 205=====
196
System Testing
NASA Technology Transfer Program  Software Catalog 2025-26
NDE Wave & Image Processor (NDEWIP), Version 3.0 L EW-18640-1
The NDE Wave & Image Processor software application has been created to provide a state-of-the-art, 
comprehensive, integrated science-based tool for the advanced visualization, processing, and analysis 
of NDE and health-monitoring waveform- and image-based data. With NDEWIP, the user has access to 
a complete post-processing capability in a single tool. Although the software has been developed for the 
NDE professional, the technology could be used for any other RF signal or image processing and analysis 
application.
U.S. Release Only
NESSUS 6.2C LE W-18229-1
The NESSUS 6.2c computer program is a set of separate but related modules for solving a wide range of 
component and system probabilistic and reliability problems, including finite element analysis, heat transfer 
analysis, geometry generation, and ceramic material property generation.
U.S. Release Only 
NISAR Quality Assurance N PO-53225-1
The NISAR Quality Assurance (QA) software provides detailed validation and verification of the science data 
products for the NASA-ISRO Synthetic Aperture Radar (NISAR) mission. It is designed for use by scientists, 
the NISAR algorithm development team, the NISAR mission Science Data System, and other users in the 
NISAR community. With the QA software, these communities can take input NISAR science data products 
and quickly generate plots, reports, quality metrics, quick-look images, verification check outcomes, and 
more on those input science products. The QA outputs are in human- and machine-readable formats, such 
as PNG, PDF, CSV, and HDF5.
General Public Release
Orbit Determination Toolbox (ODTBX) R2020a (v8.1)  G SC-18784-1
ODTBX is an advanced mission simulation and analysis tool used for concept exploration, proposal, early 
design phase, or rapid design center environments; the emphasis is on flexibility but it has enough fidelity 
to produce credible results. ODTBX R2020a v8.1 includes multiple feature additions, enhancements, and 
bug fixes from the prior release. The primary user interface and supporting functions are written in Matlab 
and Java.
Open Source
OXIMAP: A Model for the Oxidation of C/SiC Composite Structures L EW-18212-1
The OXIMAP software has been used to analyze the oxidation behavior of carbon-fiber-reinforced 
composite structures.
U.S. Release Only
PathDroid ARC-17293-1
PathDroid is an extension of the open-source Java Pathfinder (JPF) verification framework that supports 
checking binary Android applications for the absence of software defects such as unhandled exceptions 
and deadlocks. PathDroid lets users run applications on development platforms without the need for 
hardware-in-the-loop or availability of sources.
Open Source
Payloads and Components Real-Time Automated Test System (PACRATS) M FS-31383-1
The PACRATS data acquisition program allows test engineers to acquire, display, store, and retrieve test data.
U.S. Release Only
=====PAGE 206=====
197
System Testing
NASA Technology Transfer Program  Software Catalog 2025-26
PCSTAGE LEW-16325-1
PCSTAGE is simple computational simulation of multi-stage turbo-machinery blade-to-blade flows on a 
surface of revolution.
U.S. Release Only
PMESH LEW-18402-1
The PMESH grid-generation program produces three-dimensional blade-passage meshes for the 
computational fluid dynamics (CFD) modeling of advanced single- or counter-rotation turboprops and 
propfans.
U.S. Release Only
Propulsion Diagnostic Method Evaluation Strategy (ProDiMES), Version 1.0 L EW-18371-1
ProDiMES provides a standard benchmarking problem and a set of evaluation metrics to enable comparison 
of candidate aircraft engine gas-path diagnostic methods. The MATLAB-based tool enables users to 
develop and evaluate diagnostic methods independently.
General Public Release
Radial Turbine Off-Design (RTOD) Performance Code L EW-14060-1
The RTOD code predicts the performance of a single-stage radial-inflow turbine (with either radial or swept 
rotor blades) as a function of pressure ratio, speed, and stator setting.
U.S. Release Only
RAT-EDA LEW-18321-1
This NASA-developed technology is a MATLAB-language computer program for exploratory data analysis. 
Through the fast post-processing of measured time-series Raman spectral data, RAT-EDA reveals thermo-
chemical properties and turbulent-chemistry interactions in combustion. The computer program deduces 
probability density functions of combustion temperatures using user-selected super-pixel regions for each 
major species (e.g., O2, N2, CH4, CO2, or H20).
U.S. Release Only
Rotor-Stator Interaction (RSI) Broadband Noise Prediction Code L EW-18131-1
RSI is a Fortran computer code for calculating the spectrum of broadband noise produced by the interaction 
of fan-rotor wake turbulence with fan-exit guide vanes (i.e., the stator). Provided with incident-turbulence 
characteristics, the code computes the spectra of acoustic power upstream and downstream of the stator 
on a mode-by-mode basis at each frequency of interest. Target frequencies are arbitrary and need not be 
harmonics of a fan’s blade-passing frequency.
U.S. Release Only
Rotorcraft Noise Model (RNM), Version 7 L AR-17753-1
The RNM simulation model calculates community noise, computing time histories of noise for arbitrary 
vehicle flight operations. The technology accommodates multiple noise sources (e.g., rotors and engines), 
each represented by a sphere of spectral data at a reference distance. Propagation to the ground accounts 
for spherical spreading, atmospheric absorption, ground impedance effects, and limited weather effects.
General Public Release
=====PAGE 207=====
198
System Testing
NASA Technology Transfer Program  Software Catalog 2025-26
RTD Radial-Inflow Turbine Conceptual Design Code L EW-17453-1
The RTD code executes a conceptual design for a single-stage radial-inflow turbine. A mean-line analysis is 
performed for the locations having constant radius over the blade span. Constant span-fraction sectors are 
used at the rotor exit. The analysis can account for stator end-wall clearance flow and swept rotor blades. 
The loss model includes stator and rotor passage losses, trailing-edge losses, vaneless space loss, disk-
friction loss, and rotor-exit clearance loss.
U.S. Release Only
RVCQ3D.406 LEW-16851-2
RVCQ3D is a two-dimensional computational fluid dynamics (CFD) analysis code for turbo-machinery (e.g., 
compressors, turbines, and mixed-flow machines). The technology solves Navier-Stokes equations on a 
blade-to-blade surface of revolution using explicit finite-difference techniques. Three differencing schemes 
are available: central differences, AUSM+, and H-CUSP. Three turbulence models are also available: 
Baldwin-Lomax, Cebeci-Smith, and Wilcox 2006 K-Omega.
U.S. Release Only
SCISEAL LEW-16330-1
This computer program has been used to study the fluid dynamic forces in SEALS.
U.S. Release Only
Seeker 1 Simulation  M SC-27108-1
The Seeker 1 Simulation is a Trick-based, high-fidelity, 6 DoF simulation that models a 3U CubeSat, 
including sensors and effectors, and a target spacecraft for inspection.
U.S. Release Only
Single Board Computer System Monitoring Software for Radiation Testing  M SC-26984-1
This software package uses simple Python scripts to assess computer performance.  This is specifically 
intended to be used on Single Board Computers for monitoring system parameters during radiation testing.  
This is hoped to provide a powerful, flexible framework that can be rapidly deployed on a variety of systems 
(Windows/Linux, Intel/ARM) and can serve as a common community benchmark for a radiation testing 
Single Board Computers.
Open Source
SmaggIce UNIX, Version 2.0 L EW-17399-2
The SmaggIce software toolkit can be used to create structured grids for single- or multi-element 2D 
iced airfoils in preparation for computational fluid dynamics (CFD) analysis. Software tools will measure 
ice shape characteristics, add artificial ice shapes, prepare an ice surface for gridding, perform domain 
decomposition, create and modify grids, analyze grid quality, and output grids for subsequent input into 
flow solvers.
U.S. Release Only
SmaggIce Windows, Version 2.0 L EW-17399-1
The SmaggIce software toolkit can be used to create structured grids for single- or multi-element 2D 
iced airfoils in preparation for computational fluid dynamics (CFD) analysis. Software tools will measure 
ice shape characteristics, add artificial ice shapes, prepare an ice surface for gridding, perform domain 
decomposition, create and modify grids, analyze grid quality, and output grids for subsequent input into 
flow solvers.
U.S. Release Only
=====PAGE 208=====
199
System Testing
NASA Technology Transfer Program  Software Catalog 2025-26
Solar Array Verification and Analysis Tool (SAVANT) L EW-17681-1
The powerful, yet easy-to-use SAVANT quick-engineering code calculates the expected radiation damage 
to solar cells in Earth orbit. The tool contains ten types of solar cells and four types of cover glass. Radiation 
damage calculations are based on the Displacement Damage Dose method developed at the Naval 
Research Laboratories.
U.S. Release Only
Sound Lab (SLAB), Version 5 A RC-14991-1
SLAB is a software-based, real-time, virtual acoustic-environment rendering system designed to study 
spatial hearing in environments such as concert halls, listening rooms, virtual reality, aviation spatial 
information displays, and video game sound effects.
Open Source 
 
Space Science Investigations: Humans in Space (SSIHRP) M SC-26212-1
An educational game, taking the user through how a microgravity environment affects the body in space. 
Through the use of this application, the user will become familiar with what happens to humans in space, 
how the effects are being mitigated, experiments that can be done in the classroom and at home to simulate 
the on-orbit effects, and numerous fun facts about the International Space Station.
General Public Release
SWIFT v.400 L EW-17635-2
SWIFT is a multi-block computational fluid dynamics (CFD) analysis code for turbo-machinery. The 
software, which solves Navier-Stokes equations using explicit finite-difference techniques, can be used for 
linear cascades, isolated blade rows, or multistage machines. Three differencing schemes are available: 
central differences, AUSM+, and H-CUSP. Three turbulence models are also available: Baldwin-Lomax, 
Cebeci-Smith, and Wilcox 2006 K-Omega.
U.S. Release Only
System Identification Programs for Aircraft (SIDPAC) L AR-16100-1
Written in MATLAB, SIDPAC is a collection of over 300 programs that perform a wide variety of tasks 
related to system identification applied to aircraft. SIDPAC includes tools for experiment design, data 
analysis, kinematic consistency checking, static and dynamic modeling, simulation, numerical integration 
and differentiation, smoothing, filtering, finite Fourier transformation, statistical modeling and evaluation, 
optimization, parameter estimation, model accuracy quantification, model validation, and more.
U.S. and Foreign Release
Systematic Sensor Selection Strategy (S4) Software L EW-18815-1
The Systematic Sensor Selection Strategy (S4) optimally selects a sensor suite from a larger pool of 
candidate sensors based on their performance in a diagnostic system. S4’s user-defined fault-diagnostic 
approach considers conflicting objectives including cost, weight, and reliability.
U.S. Release Only
TCGRID v.400 L EW-17635-1
TCGRID is a three-dimensional grid-generation code for turbo-machinery blades. The software can 
generate single- or multi-block grids that are compatible with several computational fluid dynamics (CFD) 
analysis codes, including SWIFT and ADPAC.
U.S. Release Only
=====PAGE 209=====
200
System Testing
NASA Technology Transfer Program  Software Catalog 2025-26
TD2 Axial Turbine Design and Performance Code L EW-11029-1
TD2 performs a streamline analysis that can use meridional velocity gradients to control the radial 
distribution of work and flow for multistage, multishaft, cooled/uncooled axial-flow turbines. The effects of 
streamline slope and curvature are included in the radial equilibrium. Hub and tip radii are specified at inlet, 
at exit, and between each blade row, and velocity diagrams for each stage can be individually controlled.  
An internal loss correction determines blade-row total-pressure-loss coefficients along the streamlines.
U.S. Release Only
Tempest LEW-17294-1
Tempest was created to provide Internet/Intranet connectivity to real-time embedded applications.
U.S. Release Only
Time-Accurate, Sectored, One-Dimensional Reactive Code  
for Simulation, Prediction, and Control of Combustion Instabilities L EW-17677-1
This sectored one-dimensional model utilizes a simplified computational fluid dynamics (CFD) algorithm to 
simulate combustion and acoustic processes (including instabilities) in combustors with complex shapes. 
Utilizing modest computational resources, the code produces realistic results and is well suited for controls 
development.
U.S. Release Only
Tone Fan Noise Design/Prediction System (TFaNS), Version 1.4 L EW-17063-1
TFaNS predicts tone noise emanating from a fan stage, including the effects of reflection and transmission 
by the rotor and stator and by the duct inlet and nozzle.
U.S. Release Only
Tone Fan Noise Design/Prediction System (TFaNS), Version 1.5 L EW-17063-2
TFaNS predicts tone noise emanating from a fan stage, including the effects of reflection and transmission 
by the rotor and stator and by the duct inlet and nozzle. Version 1.5 upgrades include: the SOURCE3D 
subprogram’s ability to perform transmission-loss calculation for modes scattering into themselves; the inlet 
and aft radiation codes’ use of infinite envelope elements in the far-field; and the AWAKEN subprogram’s 
use of a new Acoustic Wake/Turbulence File format.
U.S. Release Only
TSONIC LEW-16851-3
The TSONIC Fortran program calculates the transonic velocity on the blade-to-blade stream surface of a 
turbo-machine. 
U.S. Release Only
WOPWOP LAR-16680-GS
WOPWOP is used for helicopter main-rotor noise prediction. The user must input measured air loads.
U.S. Release Only
=====PAGE 210=====
201201
Vehicle Management
Space • Air • Ground
Flight Software, Spacecraft Processes, Command 
and Data Handling, Instrument Management
201201
This image is from a series showing parts of the robotic arm on NASA’s Perseverance rover flexing and turning during 
its first checkout after landing on Mars in March of 2021. The images were taken by the rover’s navigation cameras. 
The rover is characterizing the planet’s geology and past climate, paving the way for human exploration. Credit: NASA
=====PAGE 211=====
Vehicle Management  (Space, Air, Ground)
202
NASA Technology Transfer Program  Software Catalog 2025-26
Featured Software
SpaceWire 2014 GSC -17201-1
SpaceWire is a spacecraft communication network based in part on the IEEE 1355 standard of 
communications. The 2014 version is an update to fix bugs, improve performance, and change the back-
end user interface. 
U.S. Release Only
Range Safety Algorithm Software Module for an Autonomous Flight Safety System GS C-15594-1
This software library was developed to mitigate the public safety risks associated with the flight of 
expendable launch vehicles and other unmanned flight vehicles. The software encapsulates the various 
constructs and algorithms required to accomplish Time Space Position Information (TSPI) data management 
from multiple tracking sources. At its core, the technology evaluates various user-configurable rule sets 
that govern the qualification of TSPI data sources; provides a pre-launch autonomous hold-launch function; 
performs flight-monitoring/flight-termination functions; and provides end-of-mission safing.
General Public Release
Trade-Space Analysis Tool for Designing Constellations (TAT-C), Version 2.0 GS C-18399-1
This is a tool to design satellite constellations to a set of parameters, handle multiple spacecraft sharing 
a mission objective, facilitate distributed spacecraft missions, and explore the variables trade space for 
pre-defined science, cost and risk goals, and pre-defined metrics. It optimizes cost and performance across 
multiple instruments and platforms, vs. one at a time. TAT-C leverages the use of the Goddard Mission 
Analysis Tool (GMAT) to compute coverage and ancillary data, streamlining the computations by modeling 
orbits in a way that balances accuracy and performance.
U.S. Government Purpose Release
202
=====PAGE 212=====
Vehicle Management  (Space, Air, Ground)
203
NASA Technology Transfer Program  Software Catalog 2025-26
Automated Planning and Scheduling Environment (ASPEN) N PO-41986-1
ASPEN automates space mission planning and other tasks that involve the reasoning of time, states, 
resources, and actions.
U.S. Government Purpose Release
GRIT AutoNav Monte Carlo Visualizer N PO-53026-1
Mars Rover Planners are studying the potential for AutoNav Monte Carlo simulations to help them assess 
the risks of extended automatic navigation over challenging topography. GRIT summarizes thousands of 
simulated AutoNav runs for Rover Planners to investigate and understand potential failure cases.
General Public Release
Autonomous Landing Hazard-Avoidance Technology (ALHAT)  
Scanning Lidar-Based Simulation for Mars Landing N PO-21220-1
The ALHAT simulation tool provides an efficient software model and a set of algorithms in C++ code for 
performing scanning lidar-based hazard detection and avoidance.
U.S. Government Purpose Release
Constellation Visualization Tool (CVT) G SC-17917-1
CVT is a touchscreen interactive software tool designed to model automated analyses of the Earth Observing 
System (EOS) Morning and Afternoon Constellations. Displays educate and inform users and the public about 
the missions NASA supports. Combining data presentation with user experience, user-selected stories are 
brought to life.
U.S. and Foreign Release
Core Flight Executive (cFE) G SC-16232-1
The Core Flight Executive (cFE) provides software bus, time, event, executive, table, and file services, and 
it defines the application programming interface (API) for each set function. Applications subscribe to cFE 
services at runtime, making system modifications easy. Facilitating rapid prototyping, new applications can 
be compiled, linked, loaded, and started without requiring the entire system to be rebuilt.
Open Source
Core Flight System (cFS) 101 Training M SC-26323-1
This is a training tool for learning to develop software with the NASA-developed Core Flight System (cFS) 
framework. No agreement is necessary through this catalog. Software is available at the open-source site.
Open Source
Core Flight System (cFS) CFDP Application, Version 2 G SC-16125-1
The CFDP application provides the capability to transmit and receive files to/from the ground. Tables are 
used to allow flexibility in specifying directory priorities and configurations.
Open Source
Core Flight System (cFS) CFDP (CF) Application, Version 3.0  G SC-18447-1
The CFDP (CF) application is one of the reusable applications that make up the Core Flight System (cFS). 
CFDP manages the transmitting and receiving of files to/from the ground.
Open Source
=====PAGE 213=====
Vehicle Management  (Space, Air, Ground)
204
NASA Technology Transfer Program  Software Catalog 2025-26
Core Flight System (cFS) Checksum Application, Version 2 G SC-15996-1
Checksum (CS) is one of the reusable applications that make up the Core Flight System (CFS). The 
technology performs memory integrity management by verifying the contents of critical flight memory 
regions. Unexpected changes in memory (i.e., due to an SEU) are reported to ground operators.
Open Source
Core Flight System (cFS) Command and Data Dictionary Tool (CCDDT) M SC-26167-1
This software is used with the Core Flight System (cFS) framework. It is a configurable ground-based 
software tool for managing spacecraft command and telemetry data. It accepts multiple input formats 
and produces output files suitable for use by flight and display software tools. No agreement with NASA is 
needed. 
Open Source
Core Flight System (cFS) Data Storage (DS) Application, Version 2 G SC-16126-1
The DS application provides the ability to store data (i.e., messages) into files. Tables are used to provide the 
flexibility for specifying messages.
Open Source
Core Flight System (cFS) Data Storage (DS) Application, Version 2.5.2 G SC-18448-1
The Data Storage (DS) application is one of the reusable applications that is used with the Core Flight 
System (cFS) framework. DS manages the storing of data on-board a spacecraft for later transmission to 
the ground.
Open Source
Core Flight System (cFS) Data Storage (DS) Application, Version 2.6.0  G SC-18917-1
The Data Storage (DS) application is one of the reusable applications that is used with the Core Flight 
System (cFS) framework. DS manages the storing of data on-board a spacecraft for later transmission to the 
ground.
Open Source
Core Flight System (cFS) File Manager (FM) Application, Version 2 G SC-16007-1
FM provides the user commands to perform the following operations: copy file, move file, rename file, delete 
file(s), close file, concatenate file, decompress file, delete directory contents, create directory, remove directory, 
obtain file information, obtain open file listing, and obtain directory listings.
Open Source
Core Flight System (cFS) File Manager (FM) Application, Version 2.5.3 G SC-18475-1
The File Manager application (FM) is a Core Flight System (cFS) application that is a plug-in to the Core 
Flight Executive (cFE) component of the cFS. The FM application provides onboard file system management 
services by processing ground commands for copying, moving, and renaming files, decompressing files, 
creating directories, deleting files and directories, providing file and directory informational telemetry 
messages, and providing open file and directory listings.
Open Source
Core Flight System (CFS) File Manager (FM) Application, Version 2.6.0  G SC-18918-1
The File Manager (FM) application is one of the reusable applications that make up the Core Flight System 
(cFS). FM provides the user interface to the on-board file system.
Open Source
=====PAGE 214=====
Vehicle Management  (Space, Air, Ground)
205
NASA Technology Transfer Program  Software Catalog 2025-26
Core Flight System (cFS) Framework  G SC-18719-1
The core Flight System (cFS) is the first and only community-developed, reusable, platform-independent 
embedded software framework. cFS enables embedded software engineers to innovate and quickly 
transition from concept to implementation through a carefully designed layered architecture that isolates 
software applications from the operating system and hardware platform.
Open Source
Core Flight System (cFS) Health and Safety (HS) Application, Version 2 G SC-16151-1
The plug-and-play cFS Health and Safety application is compatible with the Core Flight Executive (cFE) and 
uses the Operating System Abstraction Layer (OSAL), both of which were developed by Goddard Space Flight 
Center in order to provide a reusable, platform-independent, mission-independent, layered architecture for 
hosting applications. The technology can be used for any government or commercial spacecraft. 
Open Source
Core Flight System (cFS) Health & Safety (HS) Application, Version 2.3.2 G SC-18476-1
The Health and Safety application (HS) is a Core Flight System (cFS) application that is a plug-in to the 
Core Flight Executive (cFE) component of the cFS. The HS application provides functionality for Application 
Monitoring, Event Monitoring, Hardware Watchdog Servicing, Execution Counter Reporting (optional), and 
CPU Aliveness Indication (via UART).
Open Source
Core Flight System (cFS) Health and Safety (HS) Application, Version 2.4.0  G SC-18920-1
The Health and Safety (HS)application is one of the reusable applications that make up the Core Flight 
System (cFS). HS monitors the health of the flight software system.
Open Source
Core Flight System (cFS) Housekeeping (HK) Application, Version 2 G SC-16127-1
The cFS Housekeeping application provides the ability to organize data from various packets into new  
packets in order to best utilize the telemetry bandwidth available for a mission.
Open Source
Core Flight System (cFS) Housekeeping (HK) Application, Version 2.4.2 G SC-18449-1
The Housekeeping (HK) application is one of the reusable applications that can be used with the Core Flight 
System (cFS) framework. HK provides the capability to take pieces of data from multiple messages and 
create a new message. This is very important for bandwidth-constrained missions.
Open Source
Core Flight System (cFS) Housekeeping (HK) Application, Version 2.5.0  G SC-18919-1
The Housekeeping (HK) application is one of the reusable applications that can be used with the Core Flight 
System (cFS) framework. HK provides the capability to take pieces of data from multiple messages and 
create a new message.  This is very important for bandwidth constrained missions.
Open Source
Core Flight System (cFS) Limit Checker (LC) Application, Version 2 G SC-16010-1
The Limit Checker (LC) application is responsible for monitoring telemetry values.
Open Source
=====PAGE 215=====
Vehicle Management  (Space, Air, Ground)
206
NASA Technology Transfer Program  Software Catalog 2025-26
Core Flight System (cFS) Limit Checker (LC) Application version 2.2.0  G SC-18921-1
The Limit Checker application is one of the reusable applications that make up the Core Flight System 
(cFS). Limit Checker monitors telemetry data points in the flight system and compares the values against 
predefined or computed threshold limits. When a threshold condition is encountered, an event message is 
issued and a command script may be initiated to respond to the threshold violation.
Open Source
Core Flight System (cFS) Memory Dwell Application, Version 2 G SC-16012-1
The Memory Dwell application telemeters the contents of table-defined addresses at a table-defined dwell 
rate. Addresses can be processed using symbols if the target processor/operating system includes symbols.
Open Source
Core Flight System (cFS) Memory Dwell Application, Version 2.3.2 G SC-18450-1
The Memory Dwell application (MD) is a Core Flight System (cFS) application that is a plug-in to the Core 
Flight Executive (cFE) component of the cFS. The MD application monitors memory addresses accessed 
by the CPU.
Open Source
Core Flight System (cFS) Memory Dwell Application, Version 2.4.0  G SC-18922-1
The Memory Dwell (MD) application is one of the reusable applications that make up the Core Flight System 
(cFS). MD provides the capability of dwelling on an address or range of addresses on a flight system, 
which can be very useful tool when trying to diagnose a failure.  If the operating system supports symbolic  
addressing, Memory Dwell supports specifying the memory address using a symbolic address.
Open Source
Core Flight System (cFS) Memory Manager Application, Version 2 G SC-16011-1
The Memory Manager application processes commands, generally from the ground, in order to dump the 
contents of a memory location, dump the contents of a range of memory locations, load a memory location 
with specified data, load a range of memory with specified data, or fill an area of memory with the specified 
fill pattern. Operations can be performed on non-volatile, volatile, and memory-mapped I/O.
Open Source
Core Flight System (cFS) Memory Manager Application, Version 2.4.2  G SC-18662-1
The Memory Manager (MM) application is one of the reusable applications that make up the Core Flight 
System (cFS).  MM is responsible for the loading and dumping of flight system memory, which can be 
a very useful tool when trying to diagnose a failure.  Memory manager provides the ability to load and 
dump memory via commands as well as from files.  If the underlying operating system supports symbolic 
addressing, Memory Manager supports specifying the memory address using a symbolic address. MM 
version 2.4.2 provides fixes to bugs in the previous version of the app and compatibility with Core Flight 
Executive version 6.8.
Open Source
Core Flight System (cFS) Memory Manager Application, Version 2.5.0  G SC-18923-1
The Memory Manager (MM) application is one of the reusable applications that make up the Core Flight 
System (cFS).  MM is responsible for the loading and dumping of flight system memory, which can be 
a very useful tool when trying to diagnose a failure.  Memory manager provides the ability to load and 
dump memory via commands as well as from files.  If the underlying operating system supports symbolic 
addressing, Memory Manager supports specifying the memory address using a symbolic address.
Open Source
=====PAGE 216=====
Vehicle Management  (Space, Air, Ground)
207
NASA Technology Transfer Program  Software Catalog 2025-26
Core Flight System (cFS) Scheduler Application, Version 2 G SC-16123-1
The Scheduler application uses a one-second major timeframe that is divided into a designer-determined 
collection of equally divided minor timeframes. The technology is configurable and table-driven to provide 
greater flexibility.
Open Source
Core Flight System (cFS) Software Bus Network (SBN) Application, Version 1.0 G SC-16917-1
The SBN serves as a plug-in to the Core Flight Executive framework to transfer messages across process/
processor interfaces. The technology has three primary functions: to establish and maintain a connection to 
each peer over available process/processor interfaces; to distribute and maintain a subscription message 
database for each peer; and to distribute messages to peers that have subscribed to message identifiers.
Open Source
Core Flight System (cFS) Software Bus Network Client  G SC-18396-1
The Software Bus Network Client communicates with the core Flight System (cFS) Software Bus Network 
(SBN) application. Its main purpose it to facilitate two-way communication from the cFS Software Bus 
service to an external application (i.e., an application that is not a child task of cFS). It implements the SBN 
communication protocol. The Software Bus Network Client provides the external application with all of the 
relevant Software Bus functionality without a separate cFS core. This is implemented as a C library, and 
wrappers are provided so that existing cFS applications may use the library in place of the standard cFS 
Software Bus service.
Open Source
Core Flight System (cFS) Stored Command (SC) Application, Version 2 G SC-16009-1
The cFS SC application provides the ability to execute onboard absolute-time and relative-time command 
sequences. The technology offers a generic implementation that can be configured by a user to fit the 
needs of a specific mission.
Open Source
Core Flight System (cFS) Stored Command (SC) Application, Version 3.0  G SC-18702-1
The Stored Command (SC) application is one of the reusable applications that make up the Core Flight 
System (cFS). SC provides an onboard scripting feature. SC version 3.0 is a modification of the existing 
application but includes a breaking change that will prevent existing tables from being used with the new 
version of the application.
Open Source
Core Flight System (cFS) Stored Command (SC) Application, Version 3.1.0  G SC-18924-1
The Stored Command (SC) application is one of the reusable applications that make up the Core Flight 
System (cFS). SC provides an onboard scripting feature.
Open Source
DARTS Trade Study Tool N PO-53316-1
Multiple and simultaneous synthetic aperture radar observations taken from different look angles (i.e., 
operating in multi-baseline interferometric or tomographic mode) have the potential to provide high-
resolution, gap-free maps of vegetation structure and underlying topography with characteristics reported in 
the 2021 Surface Topography and Vegetation (STV) Study Report.
General Public Release
=====PAGE 217=====
Vehicle Management  (Space, Air, Ground)
208
NASA Technology Transfer Program  Software Catalog 2025-26
Dartslab dtest Testing Software N PO-48199-1
The dtest tool is a utility program (written in Python), that scans through a directory (and its subdirectories) 
and finds all directories that match a certain pattern (directory name starts with test_ or test-) and then 
executes any tests in that directory as described simple configuration files.  The tests are completely 
arbitrary and are not tied to any specific programming language.  A variety of tests are available to support 
comparing test output files with pre-validated versions.  Dtest can be used in an automated testing 
environment or by individual software developer to manually create or maintain individual tests.   Dtest 
accumulates tests results in data files that can be used for reporting tests results by email or on a website.
General Public Release
FilePlottingTools LAR-20449-1
FilePlottingTools (FPT) is an add-in for the spreadsheet software product Microsoft Excel which was 
developed in VB.net and that simplifies the process of making plots from transient thermal text file data 
and comparing this data across different files. The software was developed to handle delimited text files 
containing time vs. temperature data from thermal analysis, or thermal testing. It assumes that the first 
column in a file is Time, and the remaining columns are Temperature data from nodes or test sensors. The 
software could be extended to read in other types of time vs. DATA files by changing the conversions on the 
Formatted worksheet. 
Open Source
Magnetosphere Multi-Scale (MMS) Spacecraft Flight Software G SC-16471-1
This spacecraft flight software was developed to support unique multi-satellite MMS mission requirements. 
The technology interfaces to a sensor/actuator complement that includes a star sensor and digital sun 
sensor, accelerometer, and thruster hardware to implement the functionality for determining and controlling 
spacecraft attitude and orbit.
U.S. Government Purpose Release
Mesh Network Communication System MF S-33391-1
This system provides a framework for the exchange of information between multiple network nodes to 
facilitate cooperation using a distributed mesh network communication architecture. A node is any entity, 
such as a vehicle, ground control station, etc., that is connected to the mesh network. Data exchanged 
could include telemetry from vehicle-based nodes, commands from ground control nodes, and science 
data. By exchanging pertinent data, multiple nodes can act together to perform a task without requiring 
direct control from a central control node. The system was generically designed so that it would be 
applicable to any node type and many different vehicle types including UAVs and satellites. The mesh 
network architecture allows the system to adapt to individual node failures because, by design, the system 
has no master controlling the operation of the entire network.
Open Source
MSLICE: Science Activity Planner for MSL N PO-45908-1
MSLICE has been tasked to fulfill a challenging set of requirements. To meet these requirements, MSLICE 
delivers a rich feature set which includes: (1) a simple, intuitive, and powerful search capability; (2) visualization 
of the rover’s traverse in a HiRISE image; and (3) visualization of data products and the ability to view mosaics.
U.S. Government Purpose Release
=====PAGE 218=====
Vehicle Management  (Space, Air, Ground)
209
NASA Technology Transfer Program  Software Catalog 2025-26
Ndarts NPO-47703-1
Ndarts is designed as a general-purpose dynamics library that can be used for the modeling of robotic  
platforms, space vehicles, and molecular dynamics. All NASA space vehicles use such capabilities. 
U.S. Government Purpose Release
OpenMDAO: The Next-Generation Multidisciplinary Design Analysis  
and Optimization (MDAO) Open-Source Framework L EW-18550-1
OpenMDAO provides the core software infrastructure to integrate multidisciplinary variable fidelity tools 
and enable design, analysis, and optimization of complex systems. OpenMDAO functionalities include 
component linking, data passing, driver interface, and lazy evaluation. 
Open Source
Operating System Abstraction Layer (OSAL) G SC-14921-1
The OSAL library isolates embedded application software from a Real-Time Operating System (RTOS). The 
technology provides a well-defined, generic interface to RTOS services; a generic interface to hardware 
services; and an implementation for several current RTO systems. By using the library, an embedded 
application can remain portable among multiple operating systems on multiple platforms. 
Open Source
Range Safety Algorithm Software Module for an Autonomous Flight Safety System G SC-15594-1
This software library was developed to mitigate the public safety risks associated with the flight of 
expendable launch vehicles and other unmanned flight vehicles. The software encapsulates the various 
constructs and algorithms required to accomplish Time Space Position Information (TSPI) data management 
from multiple tracking sources. At its core, the technology evaluates various user-configurable rule sets 
that govern the qualification of TSPI data sources; provides a pre-launch autonomous hold-launch function; 
performs flight-monitoring/flight-termination functions; and provides end-of-mission safing.
General Public Release
ROAMS: Rover Analysis and Modeling Software N PO-30722-1
ROAMS is a planetary rover simulation software package. The technology consists of mechanical models of a 
rover, instrument arms, actuators and sensors, power resources, terrain interactions, and onboard software.
U.S. Government Purpose Release
Rock Identification Toolkit (RockIT) N PO-41133-1
RockIT is an interactive tool used by mission scientists to identify and characterize rocks and rock 
distributions.
U.S. Government Purpose Release
Simulation of Cryogenic Tank with Temperature Stratification A RC-17900-1
This is a MATLAB-based simulation of temperature stratification effects for cryogenic fluids in a tank.  
It is a reduced dynamical model describing temperature stratification effects driven by natural convection  
in a liquid hydrogen cryogenic tank. It accounts for storage, loading, and unloading of the cryogenic fluid.
Open Source
SpaceWire 2014 GS C-17201-1
SpaceWire is a spacecraft communication network based in part on the IEEE 1355 standard of 
communications. SpaceWire 2014 is an update to fix bugs, improve performance, and change the back-end 
user interface for different embedded applications to the original SpaceWire Link and Switch.
General Public Release
=====PAGE 219=====
Vehicle Management  (Space, Air, Ground)
210
NASA Technology Transfer Program  Software Catalog 2025-26
Trade-Space Analysis Tool for Designing Constellations (TAT-C), Version 2.0 G SC-18399-1
This is a tool to design satellite constellations to a set of parameters, handle multiple spacecraft sharing 
a mission objective, facilitate distributed spacecraft missions, and explore the variables trade space for 
pre-defined science, cost and risk goals, and pre-defined metrics. It optimizes cost and performance across 
multiple instruments and platforms, vs. one at a time. TAT-C leverages the use of the Goddard Mission 
Analysis Tool (GMAT) to compute coverage and ancillary data, streamlining the computations by modeling 
orbits in a way that balances accuracy and performance. 
U.S. Government Purpose Release
=====PAGE 220=====
211
NASA Technology Transfer Program
Network Directory
NASA Headquarters
300 E Street, SW
Washington, DC 20546
Technology Transfer Program Executive:
Daniel Lockney
Phone: 202-358-2037
Email: daniel.p.lockney@nasa.gov
Field Centers
Ames Research Center
Moffett Field, California 94035
Technology Transfer Office Chief:
Kimberly Hines
Phone: 650-604-5582
Email: kimberly.k.hines@nasa.gov
Armstrong Flight Research Center
4800 Lilly Drive, Building 4839
Edwards, California 93523-0273
Technology Transfer Office Chief: 
Benjamin Tomlinson
Phone: 650-276-2190
Email: benjamin.h.tomlinson@nasa.gov
Glenn Research Center
21000 Brookpark Road 
Cleveland, Ohio 44135 
Technology Transfer Office Chief:
Amy Hiltabidel
Phone: 216-433-8063 
Email: amy.hiltabidel@nasa.gov
Goddard Space Flight Center
Greenbelt, Maryland 20771
Technology Transfer Office Chief:
Darryl Mitchell
Phone: 301-286-5169
Email: darryl.r.mitchell@nasa.gov 
Jet Propulsion Laboratory    
4800 Oak Grove Drive  
Pasadena, California 91109
Technology Transfer Office Chief:
Daniel Broderick
Phone: 818-354-1314
Email: daniel.f.broderick@jpl.nasa.gov
Johnson Space Center
Houston, Texas 77058 
Technology Transfer Office Chief:
Leonard Yowell 
Phone: 281-483-2811  
Email: leonard.yowell-1@nasa.gov
Kennedy Space Center  
Kennedy Space Center,  
Florida 32899  
Technology Transfer Office Chief: 
Hetal Miranda 
Phone: 321-867-3122 
Email: hetal.miranda@nasa.gov
Langley Research Center
Hampton, Virginia 23681-2199
Technology Transfer Office Chief:
Stefan Susta
Phone: 757-788-6916
Email: stefan.a.susta@nasa.gov
Marshall Space Flight Center
Huntsville, Alabama 35812
Technology Transfer Office Chief (Acting):
Preston Schmauch
Phone: 256-544-1218 
Email: preston.b.schmauch@nasa.gov
Stennis Space Center
Stennis Space Center, Mississippi 39529
Technology Transfer Office Chief:
Tom Lipski 
Phone: 228-688-1614 
Email: thomas.lipski@nasa.gov

=====PAGE 221=====
Put NASA technology 
to work for you with the 
NASA Patent Portfolio
Aerospace Communications Electrical
Environment Medicine/Biotech
Mechanical
/Fluid Systems
Materials
Coatings
ManufacturingInstrumentation
IT/Software
SensorsRoboticsPropulsion
Power
Generation
Optics
Whether you’re looking 
to start a new company, 
enhance an existing 
product, or create a new 
product line, you can gain 
a competitive edge in the 
marketplace by licensing 
NASA technology.
Search the Patent Portfolio 
at technology.nasa.gov
NASA Technology Transfer Program
BRINGING NASA TECHNOLOGY DOWN TO EARTH
=====PAGE 222=====
There's more space in 
your life than you think!
Since 1976, NASA’s 
Spinoff publication has 
highlighted the best 
examples of how NASA 
innovations turn into 
everyday products.
Visit spinoff.nasa.gov  
to see how more than 
2,000 technologies  
benefit your life today.
NASA Technology Transfer Program
BRINGING NASA TECHNOLOGY DOWN TO EARTH
=====PAGE 223=====
National Aeronautics and Space Administration
Technology Transfer Program  
NASA Headquarters
300 E Street, SW  
Washington, DC 20546
technology.nasa.gov
nasa.gov
NP-2025-06-6637-HQ