Appears in the Proceedings of the 21th ACM International Conference on Architectural Support for Programming Languages and
Operating Systems (ASPLOS ’16)

TaxDC: A Taxonomy of Non-Deterministic Concurrency Bugs
in Datacenter Distributed Systems

Tanakorn Leesatapornwongsa

University of Chicago
tanakorn@cs.uchicago.edu

Shan Lu

University of Chicago
shanlu@uchicago.edu

Jeffrey F. Lukman

Surya University
lukman@cs.uchicago.edu

Haryadi S. Gunawi

University of Chicago
haryadi@cs.uchicago.edu

Abstract
We present TaxDC, the largest and most comprehensive
taxonomy of non-deterministic concurrency bugs in dis-
tributed systems. We study 104 distributed concurrency (DC)
bugs from four widely-deployed cloud-scale datacenter dis-
tributed systems, Cassandra, Hadoop MapReduce, HBase
and ZooKeeper. We study DC-bug characteristics along sev-
eral axes of analysis such as the triggering timing condition
and input preconditions, error and failure symptoms, and ﬁx
strategies, collectively stored as 2,083 classiﬁcation labels
in TaxDC database. We discuss how our study can open up
many new research directions in combating DC bugs.

Categories and Subject Descriptors D.2.5 [Testing and
Debugging]: Diagnostics

Keywords Concurrency bugs, distributed systems, soft-
ware testing

1.

Introduction

“Do we have to rethink this entire [HBase] root and meta
’huh hah’? There isn’t a week going by without some new
bugs about races between splitting and assignment
[distributed protocols].” — h4397

Software systems are getting more complex and new in-
tricate bugs continue to appear, causing billions of dollars
in economic loss. One notorious type of software bugs is

Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for proﬁt or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the ﬁrst page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than the
author(s) must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or
republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior speciﬁc permission
and/or a fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org.
ASPLOS’16, April 02 - 06, 2016, Atlanta, GA, USA.
Copyright is held by the owner/author(s). Publication rights licensed to ACM.
ACM 978-1-4503-4091-5/16/04. . . $15.00.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2872362.2872374

concurrency bugs. These timing-related bugs manifest non-
deterministically, and hence are extremely difﬁcult to detect,
diagnose, and ﬁx. A huge body of work exists in this space
that focuses on “local” concurrency (LC) bugs in single-
machine multi-threaded software, caused by incorrect inter-
leaving of memory accesses.

Today, beyond single-machine software, distributed soft-
ware infrastructures have become a dominant backbone for
cloud computing and modern applications. Large-scale dis-
tributed systems such as scalable computing frameworks [4,
14], storage systems [3, 6, 11, 15], synchronization [7, 10]
and cluster management services [5, 29] have emerged as
the datacenter operating system. Increasing numbers of de-
velopers write large-scale distributed systems and billions of
end users rely on the reliability of these systems.

Unfortunately, the reliability of datacenter distributed
systems is severely threatened by non-deterministic con-
currency bugs as well, which we refer as distributed concur-
rency (DC) bugs. Distributed systems execute many compli-
cated distributed protocols on hundreds/thousands of ma-
chines with no common clocks, and must face a variety
of random hardware failures [17, 25]. This combination
makes distributed systems prone to DC bugs caused by non-
deterministic timing of distributed events such as message
arrivals, node crashes, reboots, and timeouts. These DC bugs
cannot be directly tackled by LC bug techniques, and they
cause fatal implications such as operation failures, down-
times, data loss and inconsistencies.

Fighting DC bugs is challenging, particularly given the
preliminary understanding of real-world DC bugs. To make
progress, we believe a comprehensive bug study is needed.
Past studies have closely examined bugs in various soft-
ware systems [12, 44, 50], which have motivated and guided
many aspects of reliability research. There are few bug stud-
ies on large-scale distributed systems [25, 39], but they did
not speciﬁcally dissect DC bugs. One recent paper ana-

1

Appears in the Proceedings of the 21th ACM International Conference on Architectural Support for Programming Languages and
Operating Systems (ASPLOS ’16)

lyzed non-determinism in MapReduce programs but only
discussed ﬁve bugs [64]. Thorough studies have also been
conducted for LC bugs [21, 45] with many follow-up work
to date. To the best of our knowledge, there is no compre-
hensive study on real-world distributed concurrency bugs.

A comprehensive study on real-world DC bugs relies on
three key ingredients: detailed bug descriptions by users and
developers, open access to source code and patches, and per-
vasive documentation of the studied systems. Although DC
bugs theoretically have existed for decades, all the key ingre-
dients were never aligned, causing the lack of comprehen-
sive DC bug studies. There were only a few popular open-
source distributed systems [1, 37, 60], and they do not docu-
ment bugs in detail. There were a few bug detection and di-
agnosis papers that discussed DC bugs in real-world propri-
etary systems [26, 42, 43, 55, 65], but the number of reported
bugs is too few for a comprehensive study and they do not
release source code and patches. Fortunately, in the advent of
open-source cloud computing, many of today’s popular dat-
acenter distributed systems provide all the key ingredients.

1.1 TaxDC

This paper presents our in-depth analysis of 104 DC bugs.
We believe our study is the largest and most comprehen-
sive to date for DC bugs. The bugs came from four popu-
lar datacenter distributed systems: Cassandra [3], HBase [6],
Hadoop MapReduce [4], and ZooKeeper [7]. We introduce
TaxDC, a comprehensive taxonomy of real-world DC bugs
across several axes of analysis such as the triggering timing
condition and input preconditions, error and failure symp-
toms, and ﬁx strategies, as shown in detail in Table 1. The
results of our study are stored in the form of 2,083 classiﬁ-
cation labels in TaxDC database [2].

As our main contribution, TaxDC will be the ﬁrst large-
scale DC-bug benchmark. In the last ﬁve years, bug bench-
marks for LC bugs have been released [32, 66], but no large-
scale benchmarks exist for DC bugs. Researchers who want
to evaluate the effectiveness of existing or new tools in com-
bating DC bugs do not have a benchmark reference. TaxDC
provides researchers with more than 100 thoroughly taxon-
omized DC bugs to choose from. Practitioners can also use
TaxDC to check whether their systems have similar bugs.
The DC bugs we studied are considerably general, represent-
ing bugs in popular types of distributed systems.

As a side contribution, TaxDC can help open up new
research directions. In the past, the lack of understanding
of real-world DC bugs has hindered researchers to inno-
vate new ways to combat DC bugs. The state of the art
focuses on three lines of research: monitoring and post-
mortem debugging [22, 42, 43, 55], testing and model check-
ing [26, 37, 38, 59, 65], and veriﬁable language frameworks
[16, 63]. We hope our study will not only improve these lines
of research, but also inspire new research in bug detection
tool design, runtime prevention, and bug ﬁxing, as elabo-
rated more in Section 8.

2

1.2 Summary of Findings

While we provide detailed ﬁndings throughout the paper, we
ﬁrst summarize ﬁndings on the intricacies of DC bugs:

• Throughout the development of our target systems, new
DC bugs continue to surface. Although these systems are
popular, there is a lack of effective testing, veriﬁcation, and
analysis tools to detect DC bugs prior to deployment.

• Real-world DC bugs are hard to ﬁnd because many of them
linger in complex concurrent executions of multiple proto-
cols. Complete systems contain many background and oper-
ational protocols beyond user-facing foreground protocols.
Their concurrent interactions can be deadly.

• 63% of DC bugs surface in the presence of hardware faults
such as machine crashes (and reboots), network delay and
partition (timeouts), and disk errors. As faults happen, re-
covery protocols create more non-deterministic events con-
current with ongoing operations.

• 47% of DC bugs lead to silent failures and hence are hard
to debug in production and reproduce ofﬂine.

Nevertheless, through a careful and detailed study of each

bug, our results also bring fresh and positive insights:

• More than 60% of DC bugs are triggered by a single
untimely message delivery that commits order violation or
atomicity violation, with regard to other messages or com-
putation. This ﬁnding motivates DC bug detection to focus
on timing-speciﬁcation inference and violation detection;
it provides simple program-invariant and failure-predictor
templates for DC bug detection, failure diagnosis, and run-
time prevention.

• 53% of DC bugs lead to explicit local or global errors. This
ﬁnding motivates inferring timing speciﬁcations based on
local correctness speciﬁcations, in the form of error checking
already provided by developers.

• Most DC bugs are ﬁxed through a small set of strategies.
30% are ﬁxed by prohibiting the triggering timing and an-
other 40% by simply delaying or ignoring the untimely mes-
sage, or accepting it without introducing new handling logic.
This ﬁnding implies unique research opportunities for auto-
mated in-production ﬁxing for DC bugs.

• Many other observations are made that enable us to an-
alyze the gap between state-of-the-art tools and real-world
DC bugs as well as between research in LC and DC bugs.

In the following sections, we ﬁrst present our methodol-
ogy (§2) and then our DC taxonomy (§3-§7). Note that these
sections only present the taxonomy, illustrations, examples,
and statistics. Later, Section §8 discusses the lessons learned
wherein we will connect our ﬁndings with the implications
to existing tools and opportunities for new research in com-
bating DC bugs. We do not have an exclusive section for
related work as we discuss them throughout the paper.

Appears in the Proceedings of the 21th ACM International Conference on Architectural Support for Programming Languages and
Operating Systems (ASPLOS ’16)

2. Methodology

2.1 Basic Deﬁnitions

A distributed concurrency (DC) bug is a concurrency bug
in distributed systems caused by distributed events that can
occur in non-deterministic order. An event can be a message
arrival/sending, local computation, fault, and reboot. A local
concurrency (LC) bug is a concurrency bug that happens lo-
cally within a node due to thread interleaving. In our model,
a distributed system is a collection of shared-nothing nodes.
Each node can run multiple protocols in multiple threads.

2.2 Target Systems and Dataset

Our study examined bugs from four widely-deployed open-
source datacenter distributed systems that represent a di-
verse set of system architectures: Hadoop MapReduce (in-
cluding Yarn) [4] representing distributed computing frame-
works, HBase [6] and Cassandra [3] representing distributed
key-value stores (also known as NoSQL systems), and
ZooKeeper [7] representing synchronization services. They
are all fully complete systems containing many complex
concurrent protocols. Throughout the paper, we will present
short examples of DC bugs in these systems. Some detailed
examples are illustrated in Figure 2, 4 and 5.

The development projects of our target systems are all
hosted under Apache Software Foundation wherein orga-
nized issue repositories (named “JIRA”) are maintained. To
date, across the four systems, there are over 30,000 issues
submitted. One major challenge is that issues pertaining to
DC bugs do not always contain plain terms such as “con-
currency”, “race”, “atomicity”, etc. Scanning all the issues
is a daunting task. Thus, we started our study from an open
source cloud bug study (CBS) database [2], which already
labels issues related to concurrency bugs. However, beyond
simple labeling, the CBS work did not differentiate DC from
LC bugs and did not dissect DC bugs further.

From CBS, we ﬁrst ﬁltered out LC bugs, then exclude
DC bugs that do not contain clear description, and ﬁnally
randomly picked 104 samples from the remaining detailed
DC bugs, speciﬁcally 19 Cassandra, 30 HBase, 36 Hadoop
MapReduce, and 19 ZooKeeper DC bugs, reported in Jan-
uary 2011-2014 (the time range of CBS work). We have seen
much fewer clearly explained DC bugs in CBS from Cas-
sandra and ZooKeeper than those from HBase and Hadoop
MapReduce, which may be related to the fact that they
are different types of distributed systems. For example,
ZooKeeper, as a synchronization service, is quite robust as
it is built on the assumption of event asynchrony since day
one. Cassandra was built on eventual consistency, and thus
did not have many complex transactions, until recently when
Cassandra adopts Paxos. We still see new DC bugs through-
out 2014-2015 (some pointed to us by the developers); they
can be included into TaxDC in the future.

3

Triggering (§3)

What is the triggering timing condition?

Message arrives unexpectedly late/early
Message arrives unexpectedly in the middle
Fault (component failures) at an unexpected state
Reboot at an unexpected state

What are the triggering inputs preconditions?

Fault, reboot, timeout, background protocols, and others

What is the triggering scope?

How many nodes/messages/protocols are involved?

What is the error symptom?

Errors & Failures (§4)

Local memory exceptions
Local semantic error messages & exceptions
Local hang
Local silent errors (inconsistent local states)
Global missing messages
Global unexpected messages
Global silent errors (inconsistent global states)

What is the failure symptom?

Node downtimes, data loss/corruption, operation failures, slowdowns

What is the ﬁx strategy?

Fixing (§5)

Fix Timing: add global synchronization
Fix Timing: add local synchronization
Fix Handling: retry message handling at a later time
Fix Handling: ignore a message
Fix Handling: accepting a message without new computation logics
Fix Handling: others

Table 1. Taxonomy of DC Bugs.

2.3 Taxonomy

We study the characteristics of DC bugs along three key
stages: triggering, errors & failures, and ﬁxing (Table 1).
Triggering is the process where software execution states
deviate from correct to incorrect under speciﬁc conditions.
At the end of this process, the manifestation of DC bugs
changes from non-deterministic to deterministic. Errors and
failures are internal and external software misbehaviors. Fix-
ing shows how developers correct the bug. We will discuss
in detail these categories in their respective sections.

2.4 Threats to Validity

For every bug, we ﬁrst ensure that the developers marked
it as a real bug (not a false positive). We also check that
the bug description is clear. We then re-enumerate the full
sequence of operations (the “steps”) to a clearer and more
concise description such as the ones in Figure 2. Finally, to
improve the quality of the taxonimization process, each bug
classiﬁcation is reviewed by all authors in this paper. Our
study cannot and does not cover DC bugs not ﬁxed by the
developers. Even for ﬁxed bugs, we do not cover those that
are not described clearly in the bug repositories, a sacriﬁce
we had to make to maintain the accuracy of our results.

Readers should be cautioned not to generalize the statis-
tics we report as each distributed system has unique purpose,
design and implementation. For example, we observe 2:1
overall ratio between order and atomicity violations §3.1,

Appears in the Proceedings of the 21th ACM International Conference on Architectural Support for Programming Languages and
Operating Systems (ASPLOS ’16)

however the individual ratios are different across the four
systems (e.g. 1:2 in ZooKeeper and 6:1 in MapReduce). Like
all empirical studies, our ﬁndings have to be interpreted with
our methodology in mind.

2.5 TaxDC Database

We name the product of our study TaxDC database. TaxDC
contains in total 2,083 classiﬁcation labels and 4,528 lines
of clear and concise re-description of the bugs (our version,
that we manually wrote) including the re-enumeration of the
steps, triggering conditions, errors and ﬁxes. We will release
TaxDC to the public 1. We believe TaxDC will be a rich “bug
benchmark” for researchers who want to tackle distributed
concurrency problems. They will have sample bugs to begin
with, advance their work, and do not have to repeat our
multi-people-year effort.

2.6 Detailed Terminologies

Below are the detailed terminologies we use in this paper.
We use the term “state” to interchangeably imply local state
(both in-memory and on-disk per-node state) or global state
(a collection of local states and outstanding messages). A
protocol (e.g., read, write, load balancing) creates a chain of
events that modify system state. User-facing protocols are
referred as foreground protocols while those generated by
daemons or operators are referred as background protocols.
We consider four types of events: message, local compu-
tation, fault and reboot. The term fault represents component
failures such as crashes, timeouts, and disk errors. A timeout
(system-speciﬁc) implies a network disconnection or busy
peer node. A crash usually implies the node experiences a
power failure. A reboot means the node comes back up.

Throughout the paper, we present bug examples by ab-
stracting system-speciﬁc names. As shown in Figure 1, we
use capital letters for nodes (e.g., A, B), two small letters for
a message between two nodes (ab is from A to B). Occasion-
ally, we attach system-speciﬁc information in the subscript
(e.g., AAppMaster sends abtaskKill message to BNodeManager). We
use “ / ” to imply concurrency (ac/bc implies the two mes-
sages can arrive at C in different orders, ac or bc ﬁrst).
A dash, “ – ”, means causal relation of two events (ab-bc
means ab causally precedes bc). Finally, we use “N*” to rep-
resent crash, “N!” reboot, and “N+” local computation at N.
We cite bug examples with clickable hyperlinks (e.g.,
m3274). To keep most examples uniform, we use MapRe-
duce examples whenever possible. We use the following ab-
breviations for system names: “c/CA” for Cassandra, “h/HB”
for HBase, “m/MR” for Hadoop MapReduce, and “z/ZK”
for ZooKeeper; and for system-speciﬁc components: “AM”
for application master, “RM” for resource manager, “NM”
for node manager, “RS” for region server, and “ZAB” for
ZooKeeper atomic broadcast.

1 Please check our group website at http://ucare.cs.uchicago.edu

3. Trigger

“That is one monster of a race!” — m3274

DC bugs often have a long triggering process, with many
local and global events involved. To better reason about this
complicated process, we study them from two perspectives:

1. Timing conditions (§3.1): For every DC bug, we identify
the smallest set of concurrent events E, so that a speciﬁc
ordering of E can guarantee the bug manifestation. This
is similar to the interleaving condition for LC bugs.

2. Input preconditions (§3.2): In order for those events in
E to happen, regardless of the ordering, certain inputs or
fault conditions (e.g., node crashes) must occur. This is
similar to the input condition for LC bugs.

Understanding the triggering can help the design of testing
tools that can proactively trigger DC bugs, bug detection
tools that can predict which bugs can be triggered through
program analysis, and failure prevention tools that can sabo-
tage the triggering conditions at run time.

3.1 Timing Conditions (TC)

Most DC bugs are triggered either by untimely delivery of
messages, referred to as message timing bugs, or by untimely
faults or reboots, referred to as fault timing bugs. Rarely DC
bugs are triggered by both untimely messages and untimely
faults, referred to as message-fault bugs. Table 2 shows the
per-system breakdown and Figure 3a (TC) the overall break-
down. Since a few bugs are triggered by more than one type
of timing conditions (§3.3), the sum of numbers in Table 2 is
slightly larger than the total number of DC bugs.

Message Timing Bugs. The timing conditions can be ab-
stracted to two categories:

a. Order violation (44% in Table 2) means a DC bug man-
ifests whenever a message comes earlier (later) than an-
other event, which is another message or a local compu-
tation, but not when the message comes later (earlier).

b. Atomicity violation (20% in Table 2) means a DC bug
manifests whenever a message comes in the middle of
a set of events, which is a local computation or global
communication, but not when the message comes either
before or after the events.

LC and DC bugs are similar in that their timing conditions
can both be abstracted into the above two types. However,
the subjects in these conditions are different: shared memory
accesses in LC and message deliveries in DC. The ratio be-
tween order violation and atomicity violation bugs are also
different: previous study of LC bugs showed that atomicity
violations are much more common than order violations in
practice [45]; our study of DC bugs shows that this relation-
ship does not apply or even gets reversed in several repre-
sentative distributed systems.

4

Appears in the Proceedings of the 21th ACM International Conference on Architectural Support for Programming Languages and
Operating Systems (ASPLOS ’16)

Ordering Atomicity

Fault Reboot

A

B

C

A

B

C

A

B

C

CA
HB
MR
ZK

All

4
13
25
4

46

4
9
4
8

25

6
8
5
7

5
1
3
5

26

14

Table 2. #DC bugs triggered by timing conditions (§3.1).
The total is more than 104 because some bugs require more than
one triggering condition. More speciﬁcally, 46 bugs (44%) are
caused only by ordering violations, 21 bugs (20%) only by atom-
icity violations, and 4 bugs (4%) by multiple timing conditions (as
also shown in Figure 3a).

An order violation can originate from a race between two
messages (message-message race) at one node. The race can
happen between two message arrivals. For example, Fig-
ure 1a illustrates ac/bc race at node C in m3274. Specif-
ically, BRM sends to CNM a task-init message (bcinit), and
soon afterwards, AAM sends to CNM a task-kill preemption
message (ackill), however ackill arrives before bcinit and thus
is incorrectly ignored by C. The bug would not manifest if
ackill arrives after bcinit (Figure 1b). Message-message race
can also happen between a message arrival and a message
sending. For example, the ab/bc race in Figure 1c depicts
h5780. In this bug, BRS sends to CMaster a cluster-join request
(bcjoin) unexpectedly before a security-key message (abkey)
from AZK arrives at B, causing the initialization to abort.

Interestingly, message-message race can also occur con-
currently across two nodes. For example, Figure 1d illus-
trates ab/ba race crisscrossing two nodes A and B in m5358.
Speciﬁcally, AAM sends abkill to a backup speculative task
at BNM because the job has completed, but concurrently the
backup task at B sends bacomplete to A, creating a double-
complete exception at A. If abkill arrives early at B, ba will
not exist and the bug will not manifest (Figure 1e).

An order violation can also originate from a race between
a message and a local computation (message-compute race).
For example, Figure 1f illustrates ab/b+ race in m4157.
First, BAM was informed that a task has ﬁnished and B plans
to close the job and remove its local temporary ﬁles (b+).
However, just before b+, ARM sends to B a kill message (ab)
and hence the ﬁles are never removed, eventually creating
space issues. To prevent the failure, the kill message has to
arrive after the local cleanup (Figure 1g).

An atomicity violation, as deﬁned above, originates when
a message arrives in the middle of a supposedly-atomic
local computation or global communication. For example,
Figure 1h illustrates m5009. When BNM is in the middle
of a commit transaction, transferring task output data (bc)
to CHDFS, ARM sends a kill preemption message (ab) to B,
preempting the task without resetting commit states on C.
The system is never able to ﬁnish the commit — when B
later reruns the task and tries to commit to C (bc’), C throws

ac

bc

bc
ac

ab

bc

(a) 

(b) 

(c) 

ab

ba

(e) 

ab

A*

ba ab

(d) 

ab

bc

bc'

(h) 

(i) 

ab

ab

b+

b+

(f) 

(g) 

bc

cb

A*
A!

ab

ba

(j) 

Figure 1. Triggering patterns (§3.1). The three vertical
lines represent the timeline of nodes A, B and C. An arrow with
xy label implies a message from X to Y. A square box with label
x+ implies a local state-modifying computation at node X. A thick
arrow implies a set of messages performing an atomic operation.
X* and X! implies a crash and reboot at node X respectively (§2.6).
All ﬁgures are discussed in §3.1

a double-commit exception. This failure would not happen
if the kill message (ab) comes before or after the commit
transaction (bc).

Fault and Reboot Timing Bugs. Fault and reboot timing
bugs (32% in Table 2) manifest when faults and/or reboots
occur at speciﬁc global states Si; the bugs do not manifest if
the faults and reboots happen at different global states Sj.

Figure 1i illustrates a fault-timing bug in m3858. Here,
ANM1 is sending a task’s output to BAM (ab) but A crashes in
the middle (A*) leaving the output half-sent. The system is
then unable to recover from this untimely crash — B detects
the fault and reruns the task at CNM2 (via bc) and later when
C re-sends the output (cb), B throws an exception. This bug
would not manifest, if the crash (A*) happens before/after
the output transfer (ab).

Figure 1j depicts a reboot-timing bug in m3186. Here,
ARM sends a job (ab) to BAM and while B is executing the
job, A crashes and reboots (A*, A!) losing all its in-memory
job description. Later, B sends a job-commit message (ba)
but A throws an exception because A does not have the job
information. The bug would not manifest if A reboots later:
if A is still down when B sends bacommit message, B will
realize the crash and cancel the job before A reboots and A
will repeat the entire job assignment correctly.

5

Appears in the Proceedings of the 21th ACM International Conference on Architectural Support for Programming Languages and
Operating Systems (ASPLOS ’16)

z1264: (1) Follower F crashed in the past, (2) F reboots and joins the
cluster, (3) Leader L sync data with F and send snapshot, (4) In the middle
of step 3-6, client updates data with Tx-#15; L forwards the update to F,
(5) F applies the update in memory only, due to a concurrent sync, (6) L
tells F syncing is ﬁnished, (7) Client updates data with Tx-#16; F writes
update to disk correctly, (8) F crashes, (9) F reboots and joins the cluster
again, (10) L sync data with F, but this time L sends only “diff” starting
with Tx-#17 (11) F permanently loses data from Tx-#15, inconsistent
with L and other followers!

Figure 2. A DC bug in ZooKeeper.

Message-Fault Bugs. Four DC bugs are caused by a com-
bination of messages and faults. For example, in Figure 2, a
message (step 4) arrives in the middle of some atomic opera-
tion (step 3-6). This message atomicity violation leads to an
error that further requires a fault timing (step 8) to become
an externally visible failure.

Finding #1: DC bugs are triggered mostly by untimely mes-
sages (64% in Table 2) and sometimes by untimely faults/reboots
(32%), and occasionally by a combination of both (4%). Among
untimely messages, two thirds commit order violations due to
message-message or message-computation race on the node they
arrive; the others commit atomicity violations.

3.2 Input Preconditions (IP)

The previous section presents simple timing conditions that
can be understood in few simple steps. In practice, many of
the conditions happen “deep” in system execution. In other
words, the triggering path is caused by complex input pre-
conditions (IP) such as faults, reboots, and multiple proto-
cols. Let’s use the same example in Figure 2. First, a fault
and a reboot (step 1-2) and a client request (step 4) must
happen to create a path to the message atomicity violation
(step 4 interfering with step 3-6). Second, conﬂicting mes-
sages from two different protocols (ZAB and NodeJoin ini-
tiated in step 2 and 4) have to follow speciﬁc bug-triggering
timing conditions. Even after the atomicity violation (after
step 6), the bug is not guaranteed to lead to any error yet
(i.e., a benign race). Finally, the follower experiences an un-
timely fault (step 8), such that after it reboots (step 9), a
global replica-inconsistency error will happen (step 11). Put
it in a reverse way, before step 8, the global state is Si and
Si+crash→error, and the only way for the system to reach
Si is from complex preconditions such as a fault, a reboot,
and some foreground and background protocols.

Statistically, Figure 3b (IP-FLT) shows that 63% of DC
bugs must have at least one fault. In more detail, Figure 3c-e
(IP-TO, IP-CR, IP-RB) shows the percentage of issues that
require timeouts, crashes and reboots respectively, including
how many instances of such faults must be there; the rest is
other faults such as disk errors (not shown).

Figure 3f (IP-PR) shows how many “protocol initiations”
mentioned in the bug description. For example, if the system
needs to perform one execution of background protocol and

Order (44%)

Atom (20%)

FR (32%) Mix

(a) TC

No (37%)

Yes (63%)

(b) IP-FLT

No (88%)

Yes

(c) IP-TO

0 (53%)

1 (35%)

2 3+

(d) IP-CR

0 (73%)

1 (20%) 2+

(e) IP-RB

1 (20%)

2 (29%)

3 (24%)

4

5

6+

(f) IP-PR

FG

0

1

BG (52%)

Mix (29%)

(g) IP-B/F

1 (27%)

2 (34%)

3+ (26%)

(h) TS-MSG

2 (42%)

1 (47%)

3 (48%)

2 (53%)

1 (92%)

4+

(i) TS-ND

(j) TS-PR

2+

(k) TS-UEv

LM LSem LH LSil

GW (29%)

GM GSil

Local (46%)

Global (54%)

Explicit (53%)

Silent (47%)

(l) ERROR

(m) ER-L/G

(n) ER-E/S

Operation (47%)

Node

Data (28%) Perf

(o) FAIL

FixTime (30%)

FixEasy (40%)

FixMisc (30%)

(p) FIX

Deploy (46%)

Test

Undeﬁned (44%)

(q) WHR

Figure 3. Statistical overview of TaxDC. Timing Condi-
tions (TC) is discussed in §3.1, Input Preconditions (IP) in §3.2,
Triggering Scope (TS) in §3.3, Errors (ER) in §4.1, Failures (FAIL)
in §4.2, Fixes (FIX) in §5, and Where Found (WHR) in §7.

also three concurrent calls to the write protocol, then we
label it with four protocol initiations. Up to 3 protocol ini-
tiations covers three quarters of DC bugs. When we count
the number of unique protocols involved in all the bugs we
study, we record 10 Cassandra, 13 HBase, 10 MapReduce,
6 ZooKeeper unique protocols, or 39 protocols in total. This
again highlights the complexity of fully complete systems.
Figure 3g (IP-B/F) shows our categorization of protocols
that are concurrently running into foreground only, back-
ground only, and foreground-background (mix) categories.
More than three quarters of the bugs involve some back-
ground protocols and about a quarter involves a mix of fore-
ground and background protocols.

Finding #2: Many DC bugs need complex input preconditions,
such as faults (63% in Figure 3b), multiple protocols (80% in
Figure 3f), and background protocols (81% in Figure 3g) .

3.3 Triggering Scope (TS)

We now analyze the triggering scope (TS), which is a com-
plexity measure of DC-bug timing conditions. We use four
metrics to measure the scope: message count (TS-MSG),
node (TS-ND), protocol (TS-PR), and untimely event (TS-
UEv) counts as shown in Figure 3h-k. This statistic is impor-
tant with respect to the scalability of model checking, bug
detection and failure diagnostic tools (§8.2-8.5).

6

Appears in the Proceedings of the 21th ACM International Conference on Architectural Support for Programming Languages and
Operating Systems (ASPLOS ’16)

A
B
C

D

m

n

o

p

q

r

Figure 4. A Cassandra’s Paxos bug. In c6023, three key-value updates (different arrow types) concurrently execute the Paxos protocol
on four nodes (we simplify from the actual six nodes). The bug requires three message-message race conditions: (1) m arrives before n, (2) o
before p, and (3) q before r, which collectively makes D corrupt the data and propagate the corruption to all replicas after the last broadcast.
Note that the bug would not surface if any of the conditions did not happen. It took us one full day to study this bug.

Message count implies the minimum number of messages
involved in E as deﬁned in the beginning of section 3. Fig-
ure 3h (TS-MSG) shows that one or two triggering mes-
sages are the most common, with 7 messages as the maxi-
mum. Informally, zero implies fault timing bugs without any
message-related races, one implies message-compute race,
two implies message-message as in Figure 1a, and three im-
plies a scenario such as ac/(ab-bc) race where ab and ac are
concurrent or non-blocking message sending operations.

The node and protocol scopes present how many nodes
and protocols are involved within the message scope. Figure
3i-j (TS-ND and TS-PR) shows that the scale of node and
protocol triggering scope is also small, mostly two or three
nodes and one or two protocols.

The untimely events count implies the total number of or-
der violations, atomicity violations, untimely faults and re-
boots in the triggering timing condition of a bug. Figure 3k
(TS-UEv) shows that only eight bugs require more than one
untimely events. Four of them are message-fault bugs, each
requiring one untimely message and one untimely fault to
trigger (e.g., step 4 and 8 in Figure 2). Three are fault-reboot
timing bugs, each requiring one untimely fault and one un-
timely reboot. The last one is c6023, shown in Figure 4, re-
quiring three message-message order violations to happen.

Finding #3: The timing conditions of most DC bugs only in-
volve one to three messages, nodes, and protocols (>90% in
Figure 3h-j). Most DC bugs are mostly triggered by only one
untimely event (92% in Figure 3k).

4. Errors and Failures

“... we [prefer] debugging crashes instead of hard-to-track
hanging jobs.” — m3634

4.1 Error Symptoms

From the triggering conditions, we then scrutinize the ﬁrst
error that happens immediately after. First errors are the piv-
otal point that bridges the triggering and error-propagation
process. Identifying ﬁrst errors help failure diagnosis get
closer to disclosing bug triggering and root causes and help
bug detection get closer to accurately predict failures (§8).

Local Errors

Global Errors

Mem Sem Hang

Sil

Wrong Miss

Sil

CA
HB
MR
ZK

All

2
1
2
0

5

0
2
13
6

21

0
1
7
2

4
2
4
5

10

15

3
15
14
1

33

3
3
4
0

7
6
0
5

10

18

Table 3. First error symptoms of DC bugs (§4.1). Some
bugs cause multiple concurrent ﬁrst errors.

We categorize ﬁrst errors into local errors and global er-
rors, based on whether they can be observed from the trig-
gering node NT alone. Here, NT is the node where triggering
ends. It is the receiver node of untimely messages (e.g., node
C in Figure 1a) or the node with untimely fault (e.g., node
A in Figure 1i). For each error, we also check whether it is
an explicit or silent error. Table 3 and Figure 3l (ERR) show
the per-system and overall breakdowns respectively. Some
MapReduce bugs caused multiple concurrent ﬁrst errors of
different types.

First, DC bugs can manifest into both local explicit errors
and local silent errors. The former includes memory excep-
tions such as null-pointer exceptions (5% in Table 3) and
semantic errors such as wrong state-machine transition ex-
ceptions thrown by the software (19%). Local silent errors
include hangs, such as forever waiting for certain states to
change or certain messages to arrive which are typically ob-
served implicitly by users (9%), and local silent state cor-
ruption, such as half-cleaned temporary ﬁles (13%).

When local error is non-obvious in NT , we analyze if the
error is observable in other nodes communicating with NT .
Many DC bugs manifest into explicit global errors through
wrong messages (29% in Table 3). Speciﬁcally, the commu-
nicating node receives an incorrect message from NT , and
throws an exception during the message handling. However,
a few DC bugs still lead to silent global errors. These include
missing messages, where NT never sends a reply that the
communicating node is waiting for in the absence of time-
out (9%), and global silent state corruption such as replica
inconsistencies between NT and the other nodes (16%).

7

Appears in the Proceedings of the 21th ACM International Conference on Architectural Support for Programming Languages and
Operating Systems (ASPLOS ’16)

Finding #4: Local and global ﬁrst errors are about equally
common; 46% vs. 54% in Figure 3m (ER-L/G). About half of
the DC bugs generate explicit ﬁrst errors (53%), including local
exceptions and global wrong messages, and the remaining DC
bugs lead to silent errors (47%), as shown in Figure 3n (ER-
E/S). Some of them immediately lead to hangs in the triggering
node NT (9%) or a node communicating with NT (9%).

4.2 Failure Symptoms

Figure 3o (FAIL) shows that errors from DC bugs will
eventually lead to a wide range of fatal failures including
node downtimes (17%), data loss/corruption/inconsistencies
(28%), operation failures (47%), and performance degrada-
tion (8%). A node downtime happens when the node either
crashes or hangs (i.e., it may still be heartbeating). It hap-
pens to both master/leader nodes and worker/follower nodes
in our study. Data-related failures and performance prob-
lems are an artifact of incorrect state logic induced from DC
bugs. For example, in HBase, concurrent region updates and
log splittings can cause data loss. In Cassandra, some dead
nodes are incorrectly listed as alive causing unnecessary data
movement that degrades performance. Node downtimes and
data-related failures could also cause some operations to fail.
To avoid double counting, we consider a bug as causing op-
eration failures only when it does not cause node downtimes
or data-related failures.

5. Fixes

“We have already found and ﬁx many cases ... however it
seems exist many other cases.” — h6147

We next analyze bug patches to understand developers’
ﬁx strategies. In general, we ﬁnd that DC bugs can be ﬁxed
by either disabling the triggering timing or changing the sys-
tem’s handling to that timing (ﬁx timing vs. ﬁx handling).
The former prevents concurrency with extra synchroniza-
tion and the latter allows concurrency by handling untimely
events properly. Since message timing bugs are ﬁxed quite
differently from fault timing bugs, we separate them below.

5.1 Message Timing Bug Fixes

The left half of Table 4 shows that only one ﬁfth of mes-
sage timing bugs are ﬁxed by disabling the triggering timing,
through either global or local synchronization. Only a cou-
ple of bugs are ﬁxed through extra global synchronization,
mainly due to its complexity and communication cost. For
example, to prevent a triggering pattern b+/ab in Figure 1f,
m5465’s ﬁx adds a monitor on ARM to wait for badone mes-
sage from BAM after B ﬁnishes with its local computation
(b+); the result is b+-ba-ab global serialization. More often,
the buggy timing is disabled through local synchronization,
such as re-ordering message sending operations within a sin-
gle node. For example, h5780’s ﬁx for ab/bc race in Figure

8

Fix Timing

Fix Handling

Glob

Loc

Ret

Ign Acc Misc

CA
HB
MR
ZK

All

0
2
2
0

4

0
7
8
4

19

0
2
2
0

4

1
1
7
3

3
7
8
0

4
3
3
1

12

18

11

Table 4. Fix strategies for message timing bugs (§5.1).
Some bugs require more than one ﬁx strategy.

1c forces the sending of bc request at B to wait for the receipt
of ab; the result is ab-bc local serialization at B.

The right half of Table 4 shows that ﬁx handling is more
popular. Fix handling fortunately can be simple; many ﬁxes
do not introduce brand-new computation logic into the sys-
tem, which can be done in three ways. First, the ﬁx can han-
dle the untimely message by simply retrying it at a later time
(as opposed to ignoring or accepting it incorrectly). For ex-
ample, to handle bc/ac race in Figure 1a, m3274 retries the
unexpectedly-early ackill message at a later time, right after
the to-be-killed task starts. Second, the ﬁx can simply ig-
nore the message (as opposed to accepting it incorrectly).
For example, to handle ab/ba race in Figure 1d, m5358 sim-
ply ignores the unexpectedly-late baﬁnish message that ar-
rives after AAM sends an abkill message. Finally, the patch
can simply accept the untimely message by re-using exist-
ing handlers (as opposed to ignoring it or throwing an error).
For example, m2995’s ﬁx changes the node AM to accept
an unexpectedly-early expiration message using an existing
handler that was originally designed to accept the same mes-
sage at a later state of AM. m5198’s ﬁx handles the atomic-
ity violation by using an existing handler and simply cancels
the atomicity violating local operation. The rest of the ﬁx-
handling cases require new computation logic to ﬁx bugs.

5.2 Fault/Reboot Timing Bug Fixes

Table 5 summarizes ﬁx strategies for fault/reboot timing
bugs. Unlike message timing, only rare bugs can be ﬁxed
by controlling the triggering timing either globally or locally
(e.g., by controlling the timing of the fault recovery actions).
A prime example is an HBase cluster-wide restart scenario
(h3596). Here, as A shuts down earlier, B assumes respon-
sibility of A’s regions (via a region-takeover recovery pro-
tocol), but soon B shuts down as well with the regions still
locked in ZooKeeper and the takeover cannot be resumed af-
ter restart. The patch simply adds a delay before a node starts
region takeover so that it will likely get forced down before
the takeover starts.

For the majority of fault timing bugs, their patches con-
duct two tasks: (1) detect the local/global state inconsis-
tency caused by the fault and (2) repair/recover the inconsis-
tency. The former is accomplished through timeouts, addi-
tional message exchanges, or others (omitted from Table 5).

Appears in the Proceedings of the 21th ACM International Conference on Architectural Support for Programming Languages and
Operating Systems (ASPLOS ’16)

Fix Timing

G

L

Fix Handling

Detect

Recover

TO Msg

Canc Misc

CA
HB
MR
ZK

All

1
0
2
0

3

0
1
1
3

5

3
3
1
0

7

2
1
1
1

5

4
6
2
1

6
1
1
7

13

15

Table 5. Fix strategies for fault/reboot timing bugs
(§5.2). Some bugs require more than one ﬁx strategy.

The latter can be achieved by simply canceling operations or
adding new computation logic.

Finding #5: A small number of ﬁx strategies have ﬁxed most
DC bugs. A few DC bugs are ﬁxed by disabling the triggering
timing (30% in Figure 3p), occasionally through extra messages
and mostly through local operation re-orderings. Most DC bugs
are ﬁxed by better handling the triggering timing, most of which
do not introduce new computation logic — they ignore or de-
lay messages, re-use existing handlers, and cancel computation
(40%).

6. Root Causes

“This has become quite messy, we didn’t foresee some of
this during design, sigh.” — m4819

It is difﬁcult to know for sure why many DC-bug trigger-
ing conditions were not anticipated by the developers (i.e.,
the root causes). In this section, we postulate some possible
and common misbeliefs behind DC bugs.

“One hop is faster than two hop.” Some bugs manifest under
scenario bc/(ba-ac), similar to Figure 1a. Developers may
assume that bc (one hop) should arrive earlier than ba-ac
(two hops), but ac can arrive earlier and hit a DC bug.

“No hop is faster than one hop.” Some bugs manifest under
scenario ba-(b+/ab), similar to Figure 1f. Developers may
incorrectly expect b+ (local computation with no hop) to
always ﬁnish before ab arrives (one hop).

“Atomic blocks cannot be broken.” Developers might be-
lieve that “atomic” blocks (local or global transactions)
can only be broken unintentionally by some faults such as
crashes. However, we see a few cases where atomic blocks
are broken inadvertently by the system itself, speciﬁcally via
untimely arrival of kill/preemption messages in the middle
of an atomic block. More often, the system does not record
this interruption and thus unconsciously leaves state changes
half way. Contrary, in fault-induced interruption, some fault
recovery protocol typically will handle it.

9

“Interactions between multiple protocols seem to be safe.” In
common cases, multiple protocols rarely interact, and even
when they do, non-deterministic DC bugs might not surface.
This can be unwittingly treated as normally safe, but does
not mean completely safe.

“Enough states are maintained.” Untimely events can un-
expectedly corrupt system states and when this happens the
system does not have enough information to recollect what
had happened in the past, as not all event history is logged.
We observe that some ﬁxes add new in-memory/on-disk
state variables to handle untimely message and fault timings.

Finding #6: Many DC bugs are related with a few common
misconceptions that are unique to distributed systems.

7. Other Statistics

“Great catch, Sid! Apologies for missing the race
condition.” — m4099

We now present other quantitative ﬁndings not included
in previous discussions. We attempted to measure the com-
plexity of DC bugs using four metrics: (a) the number of
“re-enumerated steps” as informally deﬁned in §2.4, (b) the
patch LOC including new test suites for the corresponding
bug, (c) the time to resolve (TTR), and (d) the number of
discussion comments between the bug submitter and devel-
opers. The 25th percentile, median, and 75th percentile for
the four metrics are (a) 7, 9, and 11 steps, (b) 44, 172, and
776 LOC, (c) 4, 14, and 48 days to resolve, (d) 12, 18, and
33 comments.

In terms of where the bugs were found, Figure 3r (WHR)
highlights that 46% were found in deployment and 10%
from failed unit tests. The rest, 44%, are not deﬁned (could
be manually found or from deployment). Some DC bugs
were reported from large-scale deployments such as execu-
tions of thousands of tasks on hundreds of machines.

Due to space constraints, we do not provide cross-cutting
analyses (e.g., how many bugs have >2 protocols and >2
crashes with patch >100 LOC and were found in deploy-
ment). However, future TaxDC users can easily do so with
all the rich statistics stored in TaxDC database.

8. Lessons Learned

“This issue, and the other related issues ... makes me very
nervous about all the state combinations distributed
between [ZooKeeper and many HBase components]. After
this is done, do you think we can come up with a simpler
design? I do not have any particular idea, so just
spitballing here.” — h6060

We now discuss the lessons learned, implications to ex-
isting tools and the opportunities for new research in com-
bating DC bugs. Although many high-level directions can be

Appears in the Proceedings of the 21th ACM International Conference on Architectural Support for Programming Languages and
Operating Systems (ASPLOS ’16)

adopted from work on LC bugs, there are many interesting
challenges and opportunities unique to DC bugs.

8.1 Fault Paths and Multi-Protocol Interactions

Individual protocols tend to be robust in general. Only 18
DC bugs occur in individual protocols without any input
fault condition; only 8 of them are in foreground protocols.
On the other hand, a large majority of DC bugs happen
due to concurrent executions of multiple protocols and/or
different fault timings (Finding #2). This has a tremendous
implication to input testing: all types of veriﬁcation, testing,
and analysis approaches must consider fault injections and
multiple protocols as input conditions. Although recent work
has paid attention to this [24, 35, 67], we emphasize that all
forms of faults (§2.6) must be exercised.

8.2 Distributed Systems Model Checkers

Assuming the necessary input conditions are exercised, the
next question is: can we test different event re-orderings to
hit the triggering timing (§3.1)? This is the job of distributed
system model checkers (dmck), which are gaining popular-
ity recently [26, 37, 38, 59, 65]. Dmck works by intercepting
distributed events and permuting their ordering. The more
events included, the more scalability issues will arise due to
state-space explosion. To date, no dmck completely controls
the timings of all necessary events that might contribute to
the triggering timing (Finding #1). MaceMC [37] only re-
orders messages and network disconnections. MoDist [26]
exercises timeouts and Demeter [26] intercepts messages
and local computation but they do not explore different tim-
ing of multiple crashes and reboots. SAMC [38] exercises
multiple faults but does not support timeout and thread con-
trols. Also, none of the above include storage faults or timing
issues [27]. Therefore, continued research on scalable explo-
ration algorithms is needed, speciﬁcally when all the neces-
sary events need to be controlled. This could be helped by
DC bugs’ triggering scope characteristics (Finding #3), just
like that in LC model checkers [48].

8.3 Domain-Speciﬁc Speciﬁcations

Now, assuming the necessary events are controlled, the next
question is: do we have the speciﬁcation to judge the man-
ifestation of a bug? This is a plague for many tools. For
example, Demeter does not ﬁnd new bugs [26] and SAMC
[38] ﬁnds two new bugs. Conversations with the authors sug-
gest that their target systems do not deploy detailed spec-
iﬁcations, and thus some bugs are left uncaught. Deploy-
ing generic “textbook” speciﬁcations (e.g., “only one leader
exists”) does not help as they could lead to false positives
(e.g., ZooKeeper allows two leaders at a single point in
time). Many research papers on speciﬁcations only deploy
few of them [24, 42, 55]. Developers also bemoan the hard-
to-debug fail-silent problems m3634 and prefer to see easier-
to-debug fail-stop bugs.

On the positive side, 53% of DC bugs lead to explicit ﬁrst
errors (Finding #4), implying that sanity checks already in
software can be harnessed as speciﬁcations (more in §8.4).
On the other side, compared to single-machine systems, dis-
tributed systems are much more capable of masking errors.
Therefore, these error speciﬁcations have to be used with
caution to avoid false positives. Furthermore, 47% of DC
bugs lead to silent ﬁrst errors (Finding #4). Many of them
proceed to “silent failures”, such as data loss, node hangs,
etc. Even if they become explicit errors later, these explicit
errors could be far away from the initial triggering condi-
tions (e.g., Figure 4). In short, no matter how sophisticated
the tools are, they are ineffective without accurate speciﬁca-
tions. This motivates the creation or inference of local speci-
ﬁcations that can show early errors or symptoms of DC bugs.

8.4 Bug Detection Tools

We now discuss bug detection tools, which are unfortunately
rare for DC bugs, although very popular for LC bugs [8, 20,
30, 46, 48, 56]. Bug detection tools look for bugs that match
speciﬁc patterns. They cannot provide bug-free proof, but
can be efﬁcient in discovering bugs when guided by the right
patterns. Our study provides guidance and patterns that can
be exploited by future DC bug detection.

Generic detection framework. Finding #1 implies that
detecting DC bugs, particularly message-timing DC bugs,
should focus on two key tasks: (1) obtaining timing speciﬁ-
cations, including order and atomicity speciﬁcations among
messages and computation; and (2) detecting violations to
these speciﬁcations through dynamic or static analysis.

Invariant-guided detection. Likely program invariants can
be learned from program behaviors, and used as speciﬁca-
tions in bug detection [18, 19, 46]. The key challenge is to
design simple and suitable invariant templates. For exam-
ple, “function F1 should always follow F2” is a useful tem-
plate for API-related semantic bugs [18]; “the atomicity of
accesses a1 and a2 should never be violated” is effective for
LC bugs [46]. Finding #1 about triggering timing and Find-
ing #4 about error patterns provide empirical evidence that
these templates can be effective for DC bugs: “message bc
should arrive at C before message ac (ca) arrives (leaves)”;
“message ab should never arrive in the middle of event e on
node B”; and “message ab should always be replied”.

Misconception-guided bug detection. Knowing program-
mers’ misconceptions can help bug detectors focus on speci-
ﬁcations likely to be violated. LC bug researchers have lever-
aged misconceptions such as “two near-by reads of the same
variable should return the same value” [46] and “a condi-
tion checked to be true should remain true when used” [53].
Finding #6 reveals that DC-unique common misconceptions,
such as “a single hop is faster than double hops”, “lo-
cal computation is faster than one-hop message”, “atomic
blocks cannot be broken” can help DC bug detection.

10

Appears in the Proceedings of the 21th ACM International Conference on Architectural Support for Programming Languages and
Operating Systems (ASPLOS ’16)

Error-guided bug detection. Finding #4 shows that many
DC bugs lead to explicit local/global errors, which implies
that timing speciﬁcations for many DC bugs can be inferred
backward based on explicit errors. For example, program
analysis may reveal that a state-machine exception e will
arise whenever C receives message ac before bc, which
provides a timing speciﬁcation (ac arrives before bc) whose
violation leads to a local error; or, the analysis may reveal
that exception e arises whenever node B receives a message
cb from node C and C only sends cb when ac arrives at
C before bc, which provides a timing speciﬁcation whose
violation leads to a wrong-message global error; and so on.

Software testing. Testing takes a quarter of all software de-
velopment resources, and is crucial in exposing bugs before
code release. Although many testing techniques have been
proposed for LC bugs [9, 51, 57], there have been few for
DC bugs [58]. Finding #2 implies that test input design has to
consider faults, concurrent protocols, and background proto-
cols. Finding #3 implies that pairwise testing, which targets
every pair of message ordering, every pair of protocol inter-
action, and so on, will work much more effectively than all
combination testing, which exercises all possible total orders
and interactions of all messages and all protocols. For exam-
ple, a large number of DC bugs (Figure 3d-f) can be found
with inputs of at most two protocols, crashes and reboots.

8.5 Failure Diagnosis

Given failure symptoms, distributed systems developers
have to reason about many nodes to ﬁgure out the triggering
and root cause of a failure. Our study provides guidance to
this challenging process of failure diagnosis.

Slicing/dependence analysis.
Identifying which instruc-
tions can affect the outcome of an instruction i is a widely
used debugging technique for deterministic sequential bugs.
However, it cannot scale to the whole distributed systems,
and hence is rarely used. Finding #3 indicates that most DC
bugs have deterministic error propagation; Finding #4 shows
that many DC bugs have their errors propagate through miss-
ing or wrong messages. Therefore, per-node dependence
analysis that can quickly identify whether the generation of
a local error depends on any incoming messages would help
DC bug failure diagnosis to get closer and closer to where
the triggering events happen.

Error logging. Error logging is crucial in failure diagno-
sis. If the ﬁrst error of a DC bug is an explicit local error, the
error log can help developers quickly identify the triggering
node and focus their diagnosis on one node. Finding #4 un-
fortunately shows that only 23% of DC bugs lead to explicit
local errors. This ﬁnding motivates future tool to help make
more DC bugs lead to explicit local errors.

Statistical debugging. Comparing success-run traces with
failure-run traces can help identify failure predictors for

semantic bugs [40] and concurrency bugs [33] in single-
machine software. The key design question is what type of
program properties should be compared between failure and
success runs. For example, branch outcomes are compared
for diagnosing semantic bugs but not for LC bugs. Finding
#1 and #3 about triggering timing conditions provide guid-
ance for applying this approach for DC bugs. We can collect
all message sending/arrival time at runtime, and then ﬁnd
rare event orderings that lead to failures by contrasting them
with common “healthy” orderings (e.g., Figure 1b happens
99.99% of the time while Figure 1a happens 0.01% of the
time). Of course, there are challenges. Finding #2 and #3
show that many DC bugs come from the interactions of many
protocols. Thus, it is not sufﬁcient to only log a chain of mes-
sages originated from the same request, a common practice
in request logging [13]. Furthermore, some DC bugs are trig-
gered by message-computation ordering. Therefore, logging
messages alone is not sufﬁcient.

Record and Replay. Debugging LC concurrency bugs with
record and deterministic replay is a popular approach [52,
61]. However, such an approach has not permeated practices
in distributed systems debugging. A ZooKeeper developer
pointed us to a fresh DC bug that causes a whole-cluster out-
age but has not been ﬁxed for months because the deploy-
ment logs do not record enough information to replay the
bug (z2172). There has been 9 back-and-forth log changes
and attachments with 72 discussion comments between the
bug submitter and the developers. More studies are needed
to understand the gap between record-replay challenges in
practice and the current state of the art [23, 43].

8.6 Failure Prevention and Fixing

Runtime Prevention. The manifestation of concurrency
bugs can sometimes be prevented by injecting delays at
runtime. This technique has been successfully deployed to
prevent LC bugs based on their timing conditions [36, 47,
68]. Finding #1 shows that many DC bugs are triggered by
untimely messages and hence can potentially be prevented
this way. For example, none of the bugs shown in Figure
1a–h would happen if we delay a message arrival/sending or
local computation. Of course, different from LC bugs, some
of these delays have to rely on a network interposition layer;
similar with LC bugs, some delays may lead to hangs, and
hence cannot be adopted.

Bug Fixing. Recent work automatically ﬁxes LC bugs by
inserting lock/unlock or signal/wait to prohibit buggy tim-
ing [34, 41, 62]. Finding #5 shows that the same philoso-
phy is promising for 30% of studied DC bugs. Our study
shows that this approach has to be tweaked to focus on using
global messages (e.g., ACKs) or local operation re-ordering,
instead of lock or signal, to ﬁx DC bugs. Finding #5 indi-
cates that 40% of those DC bugs are ﬁxed by shifting mes-
sage handlers, ignoring messages, and canceling computa-

11

Appears in the Proceedings of the 21th ACM International Conference on Architectural Support for Programming Languages and
Operating Systems (ASPLOS ’16)

h9095: (1) RS successfully OPENED region R, (2) RS notiﬁes ZK that
region R is OPENED, (3) ZK continues region R state msg to Master, (4)
Master starts processing OPENED msg, (5) Meanwhile RS CLOSED
region R (asked by Client), (6) RS notiﬁes ZK that region R is CLOSED,
(7) Master asks ZK to delete znode for region R, concurrently racing
with step 6!, (8) ZK deletes region R’s znode, (9) Master never assigns
region R to any RS. R becomes an orphan!

Figure 5. Race of HBase’s messages to ZooKeeper.

tion, without adding new computation logic. This presents a
unique opportunity for developing new and more aggressive
ﬁxing techniques.

8.7 Distributed Transactions

In the middle of our study, we ask ourselves: if DC bugs
can be theoretically solved by distributed transactions, why
doesn’t such technique eliminate DC bugs in practice? Our
answers are: ﬁrst, the actual implementations of theoretically-
proven distributed transactions are not always correct (as
also alluded in other work [10, 49]). For example, new DC
bugs continue to surface in complex distributed transactions
such as ZooKeeper’s ZAB and Cassandra’s Paxos as they are
continuously modiﬁed. Second, distributed transactions are
only a subset of a full complete system. A prime example is
the use of ZooKeeper in HBase for coordinating and sharing
states between HBase masters and region servers. Although
ZooKeeper provides linearization of updates, HBase must
handle its concurrent operations to ZooKeeper, for example,
step 6 and 7 in Figure 5; there are many other similar ex-
amples.Put simply, there are many protocols that do not use
distributed transactions, instead they use domain-speciﬁc ﬁ-
nite state machines, which should be tested more heavily.

Another approach to eliminate non-deterministic bugs in
distributed protocols is by building deterministic distributed
systems. However, the technique is still in its infancy, at
least in terms of the impact to performance (e.g., an order
of magnitude of overhead [31]).

8.8 Veriﬁable Frameworks

Recently there is a growing work on new programming lan-
guage frameworks for building veriﬁable distributed systems
[16, 28, 63], but they typically focus on the main protocols
and not the full system including the background protocols.
One major challenge is that just for the basic read and write
protocols, the length of the proofs can reach thousands of
lines of code, potentially larger than the protocol implemen-
tation. Unfortunately, our study shows that the complex in-
teraction between foreground and background protocols can
lead to DC bugs. Therefore, for complete real-world sys-
tems, veriﬁcation of the entire set of the protocols is needed.

8.9 LC bugs vs. DC bugs

There are clearly similarities between LC bugs and DC
bugs, as, by deﬁnition, they are both timing-related non-

12

deterministic bugs. Many DC bugs contain LC components:
untimely messages may lead to unsynchronized accesses
from multiple threads or multiple event-handlers [30, 54] in
a single machine. It is probably not a surprise that atomicity
violations and order violations are two dominant triggering
timing conditions for both LC and DC bugs (Finding #1).
Our observation of the small triggering scope of most DC
bugs (Finding #3) is similar with that for LC bugs, which
may be related to the nature of the bug sets — more compli-
cated bugs may be more difﬁcult to ﬁx, and hence less likely
to be included in empirical studies.

There are also many differences between LC bugs and
DC bugs, as they originate from different programming
paradigms and execution environments. For example, order
violations are much more common in DC bugs than those
in LC bugs (Finding #1); faults and reboots are much more
common in DC bugs than those in LC bugs (Finding #2);
the diagnosis of many DC bugs will have to reason beyond
one node, clearly different from that of LC bugs (Finding
#4); the ﬁx strategies for DC bugs are very different from
those of LC bugs, because enforcing global synchronization
is difﬁcult (Finding #5).

9. Conclude
DC Bugs impact the reliability, availability, and performance
of real-world distributed systems. Even with all the redun-
dancy and fault-recovery mechanisms deployed in today’s
systems, DC bugs make the software as the single point of
failure. Combating DC bugs will have a profound impact to
future software systems as more organizations are building
more distributed system layers on farms of machines and ser-
vices in this era of cloud computing. The gap between the
theory and practice of distributed systems reliability should
continue to be narrowed. We hope our work will commence
more interdisciplinary actions from diverse researchers and
practitioners in the areas of concurrency, fault tolerance and
distributed systems to combat DC bugs together.

10. Acknowledgments
We thank the anonymous reviewers for their tremendous
feedback and comments. We also would like to thank Chen
Tian of Huawei and Yohanes Surya and Nina Sugiarti of
Surya University for their continuing supports. This ma-
terial is based upon work supported by the NSF (grant
Nos. CCF-1336580, CNS-1350499, CCF-1439091, CNS-
1514256, IIS-1546543) and generous supports from Huawei
and Alfred P. Sloan Foundation. Any opinions, ﬁndings, and
conclusions, or recommendations expressed herein are those
of the authors and do not necessarily reﬂect the views of the
NSF or other institutions.

Appears in the Proceedings of the 21th ACM International Conference on Architectural Support for Programming Languages and
Operating Systems (ASPLOS ’16)

References
[1] http://www.freepastry.org/.

[2] http://ucare.cs.uchicago.edu/projects/cbs/.

[3] Apache Cassandra. http://cassandra.apache.org.

[4] Apache Hadoop. http://hadoop.apache.org.

[5] Apache Hadoop NextGen MapReduce (YARN).

https://hadoop.apache.org/docs/current/
hadoop-yarn/hadoop-yarn-site/YARN.html.

[6] Apache HBase. http://hbase.apache.org.

[7] Apache ZooKeeper. http://zookeeper.apache.org.

[8] Michael D. Bond, Katherine E. Coons, and Kathryn S.

McKinley. PACER: Proportional Detection of Data Races. In
PLDI, 2010.

[9] Sebastian Burckhardt, Pravesh Kothari, Madanlal Musuvathi,
and Santosh Nagarakatte. A Randomized Scheduler with
Probabilistic Guarantees of Finding Bugs. In ASPLOS, 2010.

[10] Mike Burrows. The Chubby lock service for loosely-coupled

distributed systems. In OSDI ’06.

[11] Fay Chang, Jeffrey Dean, Sanjay Ghemawat, Wilson C.

Hsieh, Deborah A. Wallach, Michael Burrows, Tushar
Chandra, Andrew Fikes, and Robert Gruber. Bigtable: A
Distributed Storage System for Structured Data. In OSDI ’06.

[12] Andy Chou, Junfeng Yang, Benjamin Chelf, Seth Hallem,
and Dawson Engler. An Empirical Study of Operating
System Errors. In SOSP ’01.

[13] Michael Chow, David Meisner, Jason Flinn, Daniel Peek, and
Thomas F. Wenisch. The Mystery Machine: End-to-end
performance analysis of large-scale Internet services. In
OSDI ’14.

[14] Jeffrey Dean and Sanjay Ghemawat. MapReduce: Simpliﬁed

Data Processing on Large Clusters. In OSDI ’04.

[15] Giuseppe DeCandia, Deniz Hastorun, Madan Jampani,

Gunavardhan Kakulapati, Avinash Lakshman, Alex Pilchin,
Swaminathan Sivasubramanian, Peter Vosshall, and Werner
Vogels. Dynamo: Amazon’s Highly Available Key-value
Store. In SOSP ’07.

[16] Ankush Desai, Vivek Gupta, Ethan Jackson, Shaz Qadeer,

Sriram Rajamani, and Damien Zufferey. P: Safe
Asynchronous Event-Driven Programming. In PLDI ’13.

[17] Thanh Do, Mingzhe Hao, Tanakorn Leesatapornwongsa,
Tiratat Patana-anake, and Haryadi S. Gunawi. Limplock:
Understanding the Impact of Limpware on Scale-Out Cloud
Systems. In SoCC ’13.

[18] Dawson Engler, David Yu Chen, Seth Hallem, Andy Chou,
and Benjamin Chelf. Bugs as Deviant Behavior: A General
Approach to Inferring Errors in Systems Code. In SOSP,
2001.

[21] Pedro Fonseca, Cheng Li, Vishal Singhal, and Rodrigo

Rodrigues. A Study of the Internal and External Effects of
Concurrency Bugs. In DSN, 2010.

[22] Dennis Geels, Gautam Altekar, Petros Maniatis, Timothy

Roscoe, and Ion Stoica. Friday: Global Comprehension for
Distributed Replay. In NSDI ’07.

[23] Dennis Geels, Gautam Altekar, Scott Shenker, and Ion

Stoica. Replay Debugging for Distributed Applications. In
USENIX ATC ’06.

[24] Haryadi S. Gunawi, Thanh Do, Pallavi Joshi, Peter Alvaro,

Joseph M. Hellerstein, Andrea C. Arpaci-Dusseau, Remzi H.
Arpaci-Dusseau, Koushik Sen, and Dhruba Borthakur. FATE
and DESTINI: A Framework for Cloud Recovery Testing. In
NSDI ’11.

[25] Haryadi S. Gunawi, Mingzhe Hao, Tanakorn

Leesatapornwongsa, Tiratat Patana-anake, Thanh Do, Jeffry
Adityatama, Kurnia J. Eliazar, Agung Laksono, Jeffrey F.
Lukman, Vincentius Martin, and Anang D. Satria. What
Bugs Live in the Cloud? A Study of 3000+ Issues in Cloud
Systems. In SoCC ’14.

[26] Huayang Guo, Ming Wu, Lidong Zhou, Gang Hu, Junfeng

Yang, and Lintao Zhang. Practical Software Model Checking
via Dynamic Interface Reduction. In SOSP ’11.

[27] Mingzhe Hao, Gokul Soundararajan, Deepak

Kenchammana-Hosekote, Andrew A. Chien, and Haryadi S.
Gunawi. The Tail at Store: A Revelation from Millions of
Hours of Disk and SSD Deployments. In FAST ’16.

[28] Chris Hawblitzel, Jon Howell, Manos Kapritsos, Jacob R.

Lorch, Bryan Parno, Michael L. Roberts, Srinath Setty, and
Brian Zill. IronFleet: Proving Practical Distributed Systems
Correct. In SOSP ’15.

[29] Benjamin Hindman, Andy Konwinski, Matei Zaharia, Ali

Ghodsi, Anthony D. Joseph, Randy Katz, Scott Shenker, and
Ion Stoica. Mesos: A Platform for Fine-Grained Resource
Sharing in the Data Center. In NSDI ’11.

[30] Chun-Hung Hsiao, Cristiano L. Pereira, Jie Yu, Gilles A.

Pokam, Satish Narayanasamy, Peter M. Chen, Ziyun Kong,
and Jason Flinn. Race Detection for Event-Driven Mobile
Applications. In PLDI, 2014.

[31] Nicholas Hunt, Tom Bergan, Luis Ceze, and Steven D.

Gribble. DDOS: Taming Nondeterminism in Distributed
Systems. In ASPLOS ’13.

[32] Nicholas Jalbert, Cristiano Pereira, Gilles Pokam, and

Koushik Sen. RADBench: A Concurrency Bug Benchmark
Suite. In HotPar, 2011.

[33] Guoliang Jin, Aditya Thakur, Ben Liblit, and Shan Lu.

Instrumentation and Sampling Strategies for Cooperative
Concurrency Bug Isolation. In OOPSLA, 2010.

[19] Michael D. Ernst, Adam Czeisler, William G. Griswold, and

[34] Guoliang Jin, Wei Zhang, Dongdong Deng, Ben Liblit, and

David Notkin. Quickly Detecting Relevant Program
Invariants. In ICSE, 2000.

Shan Lu. Automated Concurrency-Bug Fixing. In OSDI,
2012.

[20] Cormac Flanagan and Stephen N. Freund. FastTrack:

[35] Pallavi Joshi, Haryadi S. Gunawi, and Koushik Sen.

Efﬁcient and Precise Dynamic Race Detection. In PLDI,
2009.

PREFAIL: A Programmable Tool for Multiple-Failure
Injection. In OOPSLA ’11.

13

Appears in the Proceedings of the 21th ACM International Conference on Architectural Support for Programming Languages and
Operating Systems (ASPLOS ’16)

[36] Horatiu Jula, Daniel Tralamazza, Cristian Zamﬁr, and George

Candea. Deadlock Immunity: Enabling Systems To Defend
Against Deadlocks. In OSDI, 2008.

[37] Charles Killian, James W. Anderson, Ranjit Jhala, and Amin
Vahdat. Life, Death, and the Critical Transition: Finding
Liveness Bugs in Systems Code. In NSDI ’07.

[38] Tanakorn Leesatapornwongsa, Mingzhe Hao, Pallavi Joshi,
Jeffrey F. Lukman, and Haryadi S. Gunawi. SAMC:
Semantic-Aware Model Checking for Fast Discovery of Deep
Bugs in Cloud Systems. In OSDI ’14.

[39] Sihan Li, Hucheng Zhou, Haoxiang Lin, Tian Xiao, Haibo
Lin, Wei Lin, and Tao Xie. A Characteristic Study on
Failures of Production Distributed Data-Parallel Programs.
In ICSE, 2013.

[40] Ben Liblit, Alex Aiken, Alice X. Zheng, and Michael I.

Jordan. Bug Isolation via Remote Program Sampling. In
PLDI, 2003.

[41] Peng Liu, Omer Tripp, and Charles Zhang. Grail:

[53] Shanxiang Qi, Abdullah A. Muzahid, Wonsun Ahn, and
Josep Torrellas. Dynamically Detecting and Tolerating
IF-Condition Data Races. In HPCA, 2014.

[54] Veselin Raychev, Martin T. Vechev, and Manu Sridharan.
Effective race detection for event-driven programs. In
OOPSLA, 2013.

[55] Patrick Reynolds, Charles Killian, Janet L. Wiener, Jeffrey C.
Mogul, Mehul A. Shah, and Amin Vahdat. Pip: Detecting the
Unexpected in Distributed Systems. In NSDI ’06.

[56] Stefan Savage, Michael Burrows, Greg Nelson, Patrick

Sobalvarro, and Thomas Anderson. Eraser: A Dynamic Data
Race Detector for Multithreaded Programs. ACM TOCS,
1997.

[57] Koushik Sen. Race Directed Random Testing of Concurrent

Programs. In PLDI, 2008.

[58] Koushik Sen and Gul Agha. Automated Systematic Testing

of Open Distributed Programs. In FSE, 2006.

Context-Aware Fixing of Concurrency Bugs. In FSE, 2014.

[59] Jiri Simsa, Randy Bryant, and Garth Gibson. dBug:

[42] Xuezheng Liu, Zhenyu Guo, Xi Wang, Feibo Chen,

Xiaochen Lian, Jian Tang, Ming Wu, M. Frans Kaashoek,
and Zheng Zhang. D3S: Debugging Deployed Distributed
Systems. In NSDI ’08.

[43] Xuezheng Liu, Wei Lin, Aimin Pan, and Zheng Zhang.

WiDS Checker: Combating Bugs in Distributed Systems. In
NSDI ’07.

[44] Lanyue Lu, Andrea C. Arpaci-Dusseau, Remzi H.

Arpaci-Dusseau, and Shan Lu. A Study of Linux File System
Evolution. In FAST ’13.

[45] Shan Lu, Soyeon Park, Eunsoo Seo, and Yuanyuan Zhou.

Learning from Mistakes — A Comprehensive Study on Real
World Concurrency Bug Characteristics. In ASPLOS ’08.

[46] Shan Lu, Joseph Tucek, Feng Qin, and Yuanyuan Zhou.
AVIO: Detecting Atomicity Violations via Access
Interleaving Invariants. In ASPLOS, 2006.

[47] Brandon Lucia and Luis Ceze. Cooperative Empirical Failure

Avoidance for Multithreaded Programs. In ASPLOS, 2013.

[48] Madanlal Musuvathi and Shaz Qadeer. Iterative Context

Bounding for Systematic Testing of Multithreaded Programs.
In PLDI, 2007.

[49] Diego Ongaro and John Ousterhout. In Search of an

Understandable Consensus Algorithm. In USENIX ATC ’14.

[50] Nicolas Palix, Ga¨el Thomas, Suman Saha, Christophe

Calv`es, Julia Lawall, and Gilles Muller. Faults in Linux: Ten
Years Later. In ASPLOS, 2011.

[51] Soyeon Park, Shan Lu, and Yuanyuan Zhou. CTrigger:
Exposing Atomicity Violation Bugs from Their Finding
Places. In ASPLOS, 2009.

[52] Gilles Pokam, Klaus Danne, Cristiano Pereira, Rolf Kassa,
Tim Kranich, Shiliang Hu, Justin Gottschlich, Nima
Honarmand, Nathan Dautenhahn, Samuel T. King, and Josep
Torrellas. QuickRec: Prototyping an Intel Architecture
Extension for Record and Replay of Multithreaded Programs.
In ISCA, 2013.

Systematic Evaluation of Distributed Systems. In SSV ’10.

[60] Ion Stoica, Robert Morris, David Karger, M. Frans Kaashoek,
and Hari Balakrishnan. Chord: A Scalable Peer-to-peer
Lookup Service for Internet Applications. In SIGCOMM ’01.

[61] Kaushik Veeraraghavan, Dongyoon Lee, Benjamin Wester,
Jessica Ouyang, Peter M. Chen, Jason Flinn, and Satish
Narayanasamy. DoublePlay: Parallelizing Sequential
Logging and Replay. In ASPLOS, 2011.

[62] Yin Wang, Terence Kelly, Manjunath Kudlur, Stephane

Lafortune, and Scott Mahlke. Gadara: Dynamic Deadlock
Avoidance for Multithreaded Programs. In OSDI, 2008.

[63] James R. Wilcox, Doug Woos, Pavel Panchekha, Zachary

Tatlock, Xi Wang, Michael D. Ernst, and Thomas Anderson.
Verdi: A Framework for Implementing and Formally
Verifying Distributed System. In PLDI, 2015.

[64] Tian Xiao, Jiaxing Zhang, Hucheng Zhou, Zhenyu Guo, Sean
McDirmid, Wei Lin, Wenguang Chen, and Lidong Zhou.
Nondeterminism in MapReduce Considered Harmful? An
Empirical Study on Non-commutative Aggregators in
MapReduce Programs. In ICSE ’14.

[65] Junfeng Yang, Tisheng Chen, Ming Wu, Zhilei Xu,

Xuezheng Liu, Haoxiang Lin, Mao Yang, Fan Long, Lintao
Zhang, and Lidong Zhou. MODIST: Transparent Model
Checking of Unmodiﬁed Distributed Systems. In NSDI ’09.

[66] Jie Yu. A collection of concurrency bugs.

https://github.com/jieyu/concurrency-bugs.

[67] Ding Yuan, Yu Luo, Xin Zhuang, Guilherme Renna

Rodrigues, Xu Zhao, Yongle Zhang, Pranay U. Jain, and
Michael Stumm. Simple Testing Can Prevent Most Critical
Failures: An Analysis of Production Failures in Distributed
Data-Intensive Systems. In OSDI ’14.

[68] Wei Zhang, Marc de Kruijf, Ang Li, Shan Lu, and

Karthikeyan Sankaralingam. ConAir: Featherweight
concurrency bug recovery via single-threaded idempotent
execution. In ASPLOS, 2013.

14

