ROSInfer: Statically Inferring Behavioral Component Models for
ROS-based Robotics Systems
Tobias Dürschmid, Christopher S. Timperley, David Garlan, and Claire Le Goues
School of Computer Science, Carnegie Mellon University
Pittsburgh, PA, USA

ABSTRACT
Robotics systems are complex, safety-critical systems that can con-
sist of hundreds of software components that interact with each
other dynamically during run time. Software components of robot-
ics systems often exhibit reactive, periodic, and state-dependent
behavior. Incorrect component composition can lead to unexpected
behavior, such as components passively waiting for initiation mes-
sages that never arrive. Model-based software analysis is a common
technique to identify incorrect behavioral composition by checking
desired properties of given behavioral models that are based on
component state machines. However, writing state machine models
for hundreds of software components manually is a labor-intensive
process. This motivates work on automated model inference. In
this paper, we present an approach to infer behavioral models for
systems based on the Robot Operating System (ROS) using static
analysis by exploiting assumptions about the usage of the ROS API
and ecosystem. Our approach is based on searching for common
behavioral patterns that ROS developers use for implementing reac-
tive, periodic, and state-dependent behavior using the ROS frame-
work API. We evaluate our approach and our tool ROSInfer on five
complex real-world ROS systems with a total of 534 components.
For this purpose we manually created 155 models of components
from the source code to be used as a ground truth and available data
set for other researchers. ROSInfer can infer causal triggers for
87 % of component architectural behaviors in the 534 components.

ACM Reference Format:
Tobias Dürschmid, Christopher S. Timperley, David Garlan, and Claire
Le Goues. 2024. ROSInfer: Statically Inferring Behavioral Component Mod-
els for ROS-based Robotics Systems. In 2024 IEEE/ACM 46th International
Conference on Software Engineering (ICSE ’24), April 14–20, 2024, Lisbon, Por-
tugal. ACM, New York, NY, USA, 13 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/3597503.
3639206

1 INTRODUCTION
Ensuring that robotics systems operate safely and correctly is an
important challenge in software engineering. As robots are becom-
ing increasingly integrated in work environments and the daily
lives of many people [30, 35, 52, 79] their faults can potentially
cause physical damage, injuries, and even fatalities [5, 49, 78]. How-
ever, ensuring that robotics software systems are safe and operate
correctly is hindered by their large size and complexity [42, 54].

Permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the first page. Copyrights for third-party components of this work must be honored.
For all other uses, contact the owner/author(s).
ICSE ’24, April 14–20, 2024, Lisbon, Portugal
© 2024 Copyright held by the owner/author(s).
ACM ISBN 979-8-4007-0217-4/24/04
https://doi.org/10.1145/3597503.3639206

Robotics systems, especially systems written for the Robot Op-
erating System (ROS) [66], the most popular robotics framework,
are often component-based, i.e., are implemented as independently
deployable run-time units that communicate with each other pri-
marily via messages, i.e., asynchronous data exchange [2, 13, 36, 66,
76]. Robotics systems can be comprised of hundreds of software
components, each of which can have complex behavior [10, 45, 76].
Many ROS systems are predominantly composed of reusable com-
ponents implemented by external developers [41]. In this context,
the main challenge is their correct composition [14, 76].

The composition and evolution of software components is error-
prone, since components regularly make undocumented assump-
tions about their environment, such as receiving a set of initializa-
tion messages before starting operation. When composed inconsis-
tently, the behavior of these systems can be unexpected, such as a
component indefinitely waiting, not changing to the desired state,
ignoring inputs, message loss, or publishing messages at an unex-
pectedly high frequency [14, 27, 75]. In this paper we call these bugs
“behavioral architectural composition bugs”, because they are caused
by inconsistent compositions and manifest in inter-component com-
munication, i.e., on the architectural level. Finding and debugging
behavioral architectural composition bugs in robotics systems is
challenging, because components frequently fail silently, failures
can propagate through the system, and state-dependent behavior
is hard to reason about [1, 17, 31, 42].

Fortunately, a large amount of existing formal methods research
has been done on using formal model-based architecture analysis
to ensure the safety and correct composition of components [4, 12,
20, 32, 51, 59, 60, 80]. Based on structural and behavioral models,
such as state machines, of the current system, architects can find
inconsistencies or predict the impact of changes on the system’s
behavior using existing analyses [9, 11, 23, 26, 27, 40, 47, 83]. How-
ever, in practice, due to the complexity of robotics systems, creating
models manually and keeping them consistent with the code is
time-consuming and difficult [19, 20, 80].

To reduce the modeling effort and make formal analysis more
accessible in practice, this paper presents a static analysis technique
to infer architecturally-relevant behavior for ROS-based systems.
Architecturally-relevant component behavior is the set of all behav-
iors required to describe what causes inter-component communi-
cation, i.e., what causes a component to send messages.

Architectural recovery techniques, such as ROSDiscover [76],
HAROS [67, 69], and the tool by Witte et al. [82], can reconstruct
structural models, such as component-port-connector models that
describe the organization of components and the relationships
between them, including what types of inputs and outputs the
component handles. However, they do not reconstruct component
behavior, i.e., dynamic aspects that describe how the component

ICSE ’24, April 14–20, 2024, Lisbon, Portugal

Tobias Dürschmid, Christopher S. Timperley, David Garlan, and Claire Le Goues

reacts to inputs and how it produces outputs, such as whether
a component sends a message in response to receiving an input,
whether it sends messages periodically or sporadically, and what
state conditions or inputs determine whether it sends a message.
Existing approaches for inferring behavioral models, such as
Perfume [61], use dynamic analysis to infer state machines from
execution traces. However, these approaches cannot guarantee
that the relationships they find are causal, since they observe only
correlations within behavior. Furthermore, for complex systems
they come with the trade-off of long analysis times or low coverage.
To address the challenge of automatically inferring behavioral
component models for ROS-based systems we propose to use static
analysis of the system’s source code written in C++. Static inference
of behavioral models is challenging, because the analysis needs
to infer what subset of a component’s code communicates with
other components, i.e., is architecturally-relevant, and what causes
message sending behavior, i.e., in what situations is the code that
implements inter-component communication executed.

Fortunately, the following observations about the ROS ecosystem

make ROS components easier to analyze than general C++ code:

• Inter-component communication happens almost exclusively
via Application Programming Interface (API) calls that have
well-understood architectural semantics [68].

• The causes of message sending behavior (e.g., periodic loops,
reacting to receiving a message) are usually implemented
using features provided by the ROS framework and often
follow common behavioral patterns.

Based on these observations, we make the following contributions:

(1) An approach of API-call-guided static analysis to infer state
machine models that capture architecturally-relevant com-
ponent behavior for ROS systems (in Section 3).

(2) A prototypical implementation of the approach that is an
extension to ROSDiscover, an existing tool for structural
architecture recovery [76] (in replication package).

(3) An empirical evaluation of the presented approach’s recov-
ery rate, recall, and precision of five real-world open-source
systems with a total of 534 components (in Section 4).
(4) A data set of 155 handwritten behavioral component models
of components for the evaluation systems that can be used
by other researchers (in replication package).

While this work focuses on the ROS ecosystem, the approach of
API-call guided static recovery of component behavioral models
seems promising to generalize to other frameworks and ecosystems
that follow the observations above.

2 ARCHITECTURALLY-RELEVANT
COMPONENT BEHAVIOR IN ROS

Fortunately, only a small part of the overall behavior of a component
is relevant to describe to component’s behavior on an architectural
level. This makes it practically possible for static analysis to infer
behavioral component models for complex systems. This section de-
fines architecturally-relevant behavior and describes corresponding
architectural styles offered by ROS.

Architecturally-Relevant Component Behavior

Architecturally-relevant component behavior is the set of all be-
haviors required to describe what causes a component to send
messages (e.g., triggers, state variables, state transitions).

2.1 The Robot Operating System (ROS)
ROS is the most popular framework for robotics systems, and sup-
ports a large ecosystem of more than 7 5001 software packages. In
practice, ROS is used by many companies, such as Amazon, BMW,
Boeing, Bosch, Boston Dynamics, NASA, PAL Robotis, and Siemens.
From a software engineering research perspective, ROS is a typ-
ical example of a framework for component-based architectures.
That means ROS systems are developed to consist of independently
deployable run-time units i.e., components, in ROS known as nodes,
that primarily communicate with each other via messages [2, 13, 36,
66, 76]. Each node is implemented as an independent process and is
typically responsible for providing a single function (e.g., transform-
ing depth images into point clouds, planning the robot’s trajectory,
and translating movements into low-level motor commands). Nodes
communicate with each other over named channels (i.e., topics,
services, actions). In this paper, we focus on topic-based commu-
nications and service calls, which represent the vast majority of
communications in ROS systems [76].

Services represent a synchronous two-way call-return-style.
Topics use a publish-subscribe model to provide asynchronous
message-based, multi-endpoint communication between nodes.
Each topic can have multiple publishers and subscribers. Node-
topic connections are defined in the node’s source code and are
established at run time by providing the name of a topic in the form
of a string to the ROS API. Topics are typically used for both report-
ing periodic information (e.g., camera data, sensor data, position)
and sporadic requests (e.g., disabling a motor).

Figure 1 shows a typical example of how ROS developers use the
ROS API to implement architectural component behavior. To define
behavior that handles input messages, the ROS framework lets users
register callback methods that are called by the framework when
a component receives a message (see subscribe call in Figure 1).
To define periodic behavior, ROS offers the Timer API and the Rate
API (see periodic sleep in Figure 1).

2.2 Formalization of Architecturally-Relevant

Component Behavior

To define the semantics of the behavioral models that we infer, this
section introduces the formalism of architecturally-relevant compo-
nent behavior used throughout the paper. To tailor it to the domain
of component-based robotics systems, we model architecturally-
relevant behavior as a variant of input-output state machines that
contain explicit state variables and include periodic triggers and
component-start events with the following definitions:

1https://index.ros.org/stats/ [Date Accessed: 27th July 2023]

ROSInfer: Statically Inferring Behavioral Component Models for ROS-based Robotics Systems

ICSE ’24, April 14–20, 2024, Lisbon, Portugal

𝑆 = [𝑔_𝑝𝑜𝑠𝑒_𝑠𝑒𝑡 : 𝐵𝑜𝑜𝑙]; 𝑠0 = [𝑔_𝑝𝑜𝑠𝑒_𝑠𝑒𝑡 = 𝑓 𝑎𝑙𝑠𝑒]
𝑀𝑖𝑛 = {𝑜𝑑𝑜𝑚_𝑝𝑜𝑠𝑒}; 𝑃 = {𝑝10}
𝑀𝑜𝑢𝑡 = {𝑛𝑒𝑥𝑡_𝑤𝑎𝑦𝑝𝑜𝑖𝑛𝑡_𝑚𝑎𝑟𝑘 };
𝐼 = {𝑝10, 𝑜𝑑𝑜𝑚_𝑝𝑜𝑠𝑒}; 𝑂 = {𝑛𝑒𝑥𝑡_𝑤𝑎𝑦𝑝𝑜𝑖𝑛𝑡_𝑚𝑎𝑟𝑘, 𝜖}

Transitions:
OdometryPoseCallback(𝑠 ∈ 𝑆, 𝑖 ∈ 𝐼 ):
pre: 𝑖 == 𝑜𝑑𝑜𝑚_𝑝𝑜𝑠𝑒
post: 𝑔_𝑝𝑜𝑠𝑒_𝑠𝑒𝑡 ′ = 𝑡𝑟𝑢𝑒 and 𝑜 = 𝜖

periodic(𝑠 ∈ 𝑆, 𝑖 ∈ 𝐼 ):
pre: 𝑖 == 𝑝10 ∧ 𝑠.𝑔_𝑝𝑜𝑠𝑒_𝑠𝑒𝑡 == 𝑡𝑟𝑢𝑒
post: 𝑠′ = 𝑠 and 𝑜 = 𝑛𝑒𝑥𝑡_𝑤𝑎𝑦𝑝𝑜𝑖𝑛𝑡_𝑚𝑎𝑟𝑘

Figure 2: Example model for code shown in Figure 1. The first
transition handles 𝒐𝒅𝒐𝒎_𝒑𝒐𝒔𝒆 inputs and changes the state
variable g_pose_set to true without an output. The second
transition triggers periodically with a frequency of 10 Hz if
the state variable g_pose_set is true. Then it sends a message.

Unknown Value ⊤
Finally, the formalism needs a special element ⊤ (pronounced
“top”) that is used to represent an unknown value for cases
in which the static analysis is unable to infer the value of an
expression (e.g., the frequency of periodic publishing, values of
initial states, or the right side of assignments of state variables).
It is included in all data types: ∀𝑇 ∈ 𝑇𝑦𝑝𝑒𝑠 : ⊤ ∈ 𝑇 .

Figure 2 shows the model for the example code shown in Figure 1.

2.3 Behavioral Architecture Composition Bugs
Behavioral component models can be used to find behavioral archi-
tecture composition bugs, i.e., bugs that result from incorrect compo-
nent composition and impact the software architecture’s behavior.
Figure 1 shows an example of a bug from the Autoware.AI [39]
system in which the lattice_trajectory_gen component requires an
input to perform its main functionality although no other compo-
nent sends this message. Hence, lattice_trajectory_gen waits indef-
initely. Approaches that recover only component-port-connector
(CPC) models, such as ROSDiscover [76], cannot find this bug,
because they cannot infer that the input is required, i.e., the com-
ponent’s main functionality depends on it. Our approach classifies
the input as required by inferring component state machines; iden-
tifying that the component’s expected behavior happens in the
state g_pose_set == true, which is triggered only by the message
input; and detecting that no other component sends this message.
Compared to ROSDiscover, ROSInfer adds models of internal
component behaviors in the format of component state machines
supporting the finding of behavioral architecture composition bugs.
In particular, it can find three real-world bugs from the original
ROSDiscover evaluation, that ROSDiscover was unable to find
(autoware-02, autoware-03, and autoware-10) [76].

Besides these Autoware bugs, our approach increases the practi-
cality and accessibility of a large amount of existing analyses on
component state machine models to find behavioral architecture

Figure 1: Simplified example of a ROS component (lat-
tice_trajectory_gen) that waits for an input message and then
periodically publishes a message with a frequency of 10 Hz.

Component State Machine 𝑪 := (𝑺, 𝒔0, 𝑰 , 𝑶, 𝜹)

A component state machine 𝐶 is a 5-tuple of states 𝑆, an initial
state 𝑠0 ∈ 𝑆, input triggers 𝐼 , outputs 𝑂, and transitions 𝛿.

Component States 𝑺 := [𝒗𝒂𝒓1 : 𝑩1, 𝒗𝒂𝒓2 : 𝑩2, ..., 𝒗𝒂𝒓𝒏 : 𝑩𝒏]

Component states 𝑆 are records of named state variables
𝑣𝑎𝑟1, 𝑣𝑎𝑟2, ..., 𝑣𝑎𝑟𝑛 ∈ 𝑆𝑡𝑟𝑖𝑛𝑔 with types 𝐵1, 𝐵2, ..., 𝐵𝑛 ∈ 𝑇𝑦𝑝𝑒𝑠.
𝑇𝑦𝑝𝑒𝑠 := {𝐵𝑜𝑜𝑙, 𝐼𝑛𝑡, 𝐸𝑛𝑢𝑚, 𝐹𝑙𝑜𝑎𝑡, 𝑆𝑡𝑟𝑖𝑛𝑔}.

Input Triggers 𝑰 ⊆ 𝑴𝒊𝒏 ∪ 𝑷 ∪ 𝑬

An input trigger is a message handled by an input port 𝒎 ∈
𝑴𝒊𝒏, a periodic trigger 𝒑𝒇 ∈ 𝑷 with frequency 𝑓 ∈ 𝐹𝑙𝑜𝑎𝑡, or a
component event 𝒆 ∈ 𝑬, such as “component started”. To keep
the model simple, we do not model the content of messages.

Outputs 𝑶 ⊆ 𝑴𝒐𝒖𝒕 ∪ {𝝐 }

Outputs are either messages sent through output port 𝑚 ∈ 𝑀𝑜𝑢𝑡
or the empty output 𝜖 for transitions that change only the state
but do not produce an output.

Transition Function 𝜹 := 𝑺 × 𝑰 ⇀ 𝑶 × 𝑺
The partial transition function 𝛿 := 𝑆 × 𝐼 ⇀ 𝑂 × 𝑆 is represented
in pre- and post-condition form with preconditions being pred-
icates on 𝑠 ∈ 𝑆 and 𝑖 ∈ 𝐼 that define for which inputs and
states the transition is triggered and post-conditions defining
an output 𝑜 ∈ 𝑂 and the next state 𝑠′ ∈ 𝑆 in terms of 𝑠 and 𝑖.

bool g_pose_set = false;void OdometryPoseCallback(const OdometryConstPtr msg){  g_pose_set = true; }static const int LOOP_RATE = 10; //Hzint main(int argc, char** argv){  ros::NodeHandle nh = getNodeHandle();  ros::Subscriber odometry_subscriber =  nh.subscribe(       "odom_pose", OdometryPoseCallback);   ros::Publisher vis_pub = nh.advertise("next_waypoint_mark");   ros::Rate loop_rate(LOOP_RATE);      while (ros::ok())  {    if (g_pose_set == false)    {      loop_rate.sleep();       continue; }  vis_pub.publish(marker);  loop_rate.sleep();   }        return 0;}State ChangeReactive BehaviorCallbackTriggerInitial StatePeriodic LoopMessage OutputState ConditionPeriodic SleepICSE ’24, April 14–20, 2024, Lisbon, Portugal

Tobias Dürschmid, Christopher S. Timperley, David Garlan, and Claire Le Goues

Figure 3: Overview of the ROSInfer static analysis. Boxes represent analysis steps (see Section 3), gray ovals represent elements
of the output model (see Section 2.2), white ovals represent intermediate results, and arrows indicate data flow.

composition bugs [6, 7, 9, 23, 26, 27, 43, 44, 47, 74, 83], since ro-
manticists do not need to create the required models manually.
Thereby, it becomes easier for them to ensure the safety and correct
composition of software components [2, 4, 12, 32, 51, 59, 60, 80].

To check whether the components of a system are composed
correctly, properties such as “An input at input port 𝐼1 of component
𝐶𝑎 can/must result in an output at output port 𝑂1 of 𝐶𝑏 ” can be
checked via discrete event simulation [11] or logical reasoning [40].
Furthermore, synchronizing the resulting component state ma-
chines on their input/output messages creates a system-wide state
machine model over which system-level Linear Temporal Logic
(LTL) properties can be checked via approaches such as the ROS
theorem prover by Kortik and Shastha [43] or PlusCal/TLA+ [48].
On these models, properties, such as a component changing to a
desired state, no messages getting lost or ignored, or a component
eventually publishing a certain message, can be checked [23, 26].
Additionally, knowing the frequencies at which periodic mes-
sages get published allows reasoning about the frequencies of tran-
sitive receivers of a message to check for unexpectedly high pub-
lishing frequencies (e.g., if behavior is not supposed to be periodic
but reacts to periodically sent input).

3 APPROACH
This section describes our approach of API-call-guided static in-
ference of architecturally-relevant component behavior for ROS
systems and the implementation of this approach in our tool called
ROSInfer. The analysis process is shown in Figure 3.

In general, even inferring only architecturally-relevant behavior
is challenging, because theoretically any piece of code could send
a message. Fortunately, the following observations about how the
ROS framework is used in practice allow us to narrow down the
analysis:

Component Framework API: Inter-component communica-
tion for sending and receiving messages is implemented al-
most exclusively via API calls that have well-understood
architectural semantics [68, 76]. This simplifies the static
inference of architecturally-relevant behavior by reducing
the problem of tracing message-sending behavior to code lo-
cations to finding the corresponding API calls and inferring
their arguments.

Behavioral Patterns Usage: The triggers of message sending
behavior are usually implemented using common behavioral
patterns (e.g., implementing periodic behavior by sending
messages in an unbounded loop that sleeps for the remainder

of a periodic interval as shown in Figure 1). This simplifies
the problem of identifying the triggers and effects of mes-
sage sending / receiving behavior by looking for common
patterns.

We consider behavior to be reactive if it is triggered by receiving
a message or a component-event (e.g., component started/stopped
or (un)subscribed from/to a topic). We consider behavior to be
periodic if it is triggered with a constant target frequency. Periodic
and reactive behavior can both be state-based, i.e., triggered only
under conditions depending on the state of the component.

The key idea of our approach is to find ROS API calls that imple-
ment the triggers or outputs of architecturally-relevant behavior,
infer the API call arguments, find control flow leading to message
sending behavior, and reconstruct state variables and state transi-
tions on which architecturally-relevant behavior depends. While
our approach focuses on the ROS ecosystem, it can generalize to
every framework or ecosystem for which the observations listed
above hold true as well.

The remainder of the section describes each analysis step.

3.1 API Call Detection
The first step in API-call-guided inference of component behav-
ioral models is to detect API calls that implement elements of
architecturally-relevant behavior. ROSInfer accomplishes this by
traversing the Abstract Syntax Tree (AST) and detecting syntactic
patterns that identify architecturally-relevant API calls (see below).
ROSInfer detects API calls via AST matchers that look for method
calls based on the fully qualified method name and argument list.
For most kinds of API calls, ROSInfer then attempts to recover the
values of arguments and the object on which the function is called
to infer additional details, such as what port owns this behavior, or
the frequency / duration of sleep calls.

ROSInfer detects the following API calls and behaviors:
Inferring Message Outputs 𝑴𝒐𝒖𝒕 : To infer message outputs
𝑀𝑜𝑢𝑡 behavioral inference approaches need to identity points in the
component’s source code that send messages to other components.
For publish-subscribe styles, this consists of API calls to publish
a message and corresponding API wrappers (e.g., sendTransform,
diagnostic_updater, and CameraPublisher).

To identify the corresponding output port, ROSInfer infers the
publisher object on which each publish call is made and traces the
object to its creation via the NodeHandle::advertise API call.

Inferring Reactive Triggers 𝑴𝒊𝒏: To infer reactive triggers,
behavioral inference needs to looks for the control flow entry points

ROSInferInitial  StateState   Variables1. API CallDetection3. State Variable Detection2. Behavioral Pattern Detection5. Initial State Inference𝑷 𝑴𝒐𝒖𝒕 𝑴𝒊𝒏 𝑬𝑺𝒔𝟎SourceCode4. Transition InferenceModel𝑪Behavioral Patterns Transitions 𝜹ROSInfer: Statically Inferring Behavioral Component Models for ROS-based Robotics Systems

ICSE ’24, April 14–20, 2024, Lisbon, Portugal

(i.e., callbacks that handle a received message or a requested ser-
vice or the component being started). In publish-subscribe styles,
subscriber callbacks define the component’s behavior in response
to receiving a certain message. Analogously, in call-return styles
service call callbacks need to be identified.

To identify control flow entry points of detected input ports
ROSInfer looks for callbacks that are parameters to the ROS API
calls subscribe, registerCallback,2 and advertiseService.

Inferring Periodic Triggers 𝑷 : To infer periodic triggers, be-
havioral inference needs to identity sleep calls. There are two kinds
of sleep calls: (1) constant-time sleep calls that sleep for the same
amount of time every time they are called, (2) filling-time sleep calls
that sleep for the remainder of a periodic interval every time they
are called. Filling-time sleep calls allow the accurate static inference
of the target frequency (unless the execution of each cycle takes
longer than the cycle time, resulting in a lower actual frequency)
while constant-time sleep calls can provide only an upper bound
on the frequency, since execution times of other statements are not
captured.

C++ offers three common constant-time sleep calls: usleep,
sleep, and std::this_thread::sleep_for. The ROS framework
offers Duration::sleep. ROSInfer detects these calls and infers
the duration and their units from arguments using constant-folding.
ROS offers two filling-time API calls: Rate::sleep, which is
called on a rate object (see periodic sleep in Figure 1), and NodeHandle
::createTimer, which has a rate object and callback as argument.
Since the frequency is specified in the constructor of the Rate ob-
ject ROSInfer uses constant-folding to infer the frequency’s value
and denotes it with ⊤ if it cannot constant-fold it.

3.2 Behavioral Pattern Detection
After API call detection, ROSInfer runs a control-flow analysis on
the program to construct an abstract representation of the program
that contains APIs calls, control flow statements, function calls,
and assignments. On this abstract representation, ROSInfer de-
tects behavioral patterns that describe the architecturally-relevant
behavior.

Detecting Reactive Behavior: Reactive publishing behavior
is message sending that is caused by receiving a message or a
component event. To detect message outputs 𝑜𝑢𝑡 ∈ 𝑀𝑜𝑢𝑡 reacting
to message inputs 𝑖𝑛 ∈ 𝑀𝑖𝑛 ROSInfer looks for the behavioral
pattern of publish calls happening (transitively) within a subscriber
callback method by checking for a path in the call graph from
the callback method for 𝑖𝑛 to any publish calls of 𝑜𝑢𝑡. Since some
systems pass publish objects as arguments to functions that then
call publish on their arguments, ROSInfer tracks the object identity
of arguments when traversing the call graph. This pattern is shown
in Figure 4.

The other pattern for reactive behavior that ROSInfer identifies
is if a publish call happens (transitively) within the main method
and its control dependencies are satisfied in the initial state, then it
responds to the component event “component-started” ∈ 𝐸.

2To filter messages or to define a single callback method for multiple subscribers, ROS
offers the message filters API.

Figure 4: Simplified behavioral pattern to look for reactive
message behavior.

Figure 5: Simplified behavioral pattern to look for periodic
behavior.

Detecting Periodic Behavior: Periodic publishing behavior is
repeated sending of a message of the same type with a constant up-
per target frequency (note that messages do not necessarily always
have to be sent every interval). The pattern to detect periodic be-
havior is checking for publish calls that happen (transitively) within
unbounded loops that (transitively) contain a sleep call, as these
sleep calls happen periodically throughout the normal execution
of the program. To identify unbounded loops ROSInfer considers
loop conditions that are either true or ros::ok(). This pattern is
shown in Figure 5.

3.3 State Variable Detection
The key idea to infer state variables statically is to look for variables
in the code that store state information, such as ready in Figure 1.
We use the following heuristics to identify variables that represent
component state.

Usage Heuristic: The variable is used in control conditions of
architecturally-relevant behavior (i.e., functions that send messages,
functions that change state variables, and of their transitive callers).
Control conditions describe the conditions that determine whether
a statement is executed.

Scope Heuristic: The variable is in global or component-wide
scope, such as member variables of component classes or non-local
variables. Since local variables are used close to their assignments,
they are less likely to capture state information than variables that
can be changed in callbacks or other functions. This heuristic limits
the search space and complexity of the resulting models, because
control conditions can contain complex logic that defined behavior
that is not architecturally relevant.

To implement the usage heuristic ROSInfer first infers all control
conditions for all publish calls and their transitive calls and removes
conditions on variables that do not satisfy the scope heuristic and
uses constant folding to replace variables and constants with the
literals that they represent.

CallExpr(callee, caller):isPublishCall(callee)Publisher pub(𝑜𝑢𝑡 = topic)callbackName == namecaller == pub<<transitive child>>CallExpr(callee, caller):isSubscribeCall(callee)𝑖𝑛 = topicArg(callee)Callback(name, body)CallExpr(callee, args):isPublishCall(callee)<<transitive child>>Publisher pub(𝑚𝑜𝑢𝑡 = topic)<<transitive child>>args[1] = pubRate rate (𝑝𝑓 = frequency)args[1] = pubWhileStmt(condition):isIndefinite(condition)CallExpr(callee, args):isFillingTimeSleep(callee) or isConstTimeSleep(callee)ICSE ’24, April 14–20, 2024, Lisbon, Portugal

Tobias Dürschmid, Christopher S. Timperley, David Garlan, and Claire Le Goues

3.4 Transition Inference
After detecting state variables and inferring behavioral patterns for
reactive and periodic behaviors, the only information that remains
to be inferred to create complete transition functions 𝛿 are condi-
tions on state variables and state changes. ROSInfer identifies the
intra-procedural control conditions for each publish call and its
transitive function calls. In an inter-procedural analysis on the call
graph starting from the behavior’s trigger ROSInfer then combines
the control conditions of function calls ending in the publish call.
Conditions are combined using a logical AND and negated in the
case of taking the else branch of an if-statement.

To infer state changes, ROSInfer detects assignments to state
variables, constant-folds the right hand-side of the assignments,
and infers the assignments’ triggers in the same way as for other
architecturally-relevant behavior as described above. ROSInfer
then groups behaviors by triggers and state conditions and con-
structs the union of all outputs and state changes with the same
triggers and conditions.

3.5 Initial Value Inference
To infer the initial state 𝑠𝑜 ∈ 𝑆 (i.e., the initial values for each state
variable) of a component, ROSInfer searches for the first definitions
of the variables. These can be either in their declarations, in the
program entry point of the component (e.g., main) and its transitive
calls, or in statements or initializers of component class constructors.
If an initial expression is found ROSInfer attempts to constant-fold
the expression. Analogous to previous cases, values that cannot be
constant-folded are denoted with ⊤.

3.6 Implementation
We implemented ROSInfer using Clang for C/C++ as an extension
of ROSDiscover [76]. (ROSDiscover and ROSInfer do not support
Python, because C++ is the most used language in ROS [68].)

The ROS system is analyzed within a Docker container that
contains the source code, ROS packages, and other dependencies.
ROSInfer infers the API calls and its parameters, as well as AST
elements such as while statements, if statements, and assignments
and creates an abstraction of the component. Then it looks for
the patterns described in the previous section and creates a JSON
output that contains reactive, periodic, and state-based behavior
from which the state machines described in Section 2.2 can be
reconstructed. Finally, ROSInfer generates a PlusCal/TLA+ [48]
specification containing the behavior and connectors of all com-
ponents in the system configuration. To detect bugs, users can
either specify their own LTL properties or provide a list of expected
outputs to happen, from which ROSInfer auto-generates the corre-
sponding LTL properties. The implementation is openly accessible
on GitHub: https://github.com/cmu-rss-lab/rosdiscover-evaluation

4 EVALUATION
In this section we describe how we evaluate the overall approach of
API-call-guided static inference of architecturally-relevant compo-
nent behavior in ROS systems as well as the results of our evaluation
of ROSInfer’s recovery rate, recall, precision, and execution time
on five large, real-world open source ROS systems.

4.1 Experimental Setup
To evaluate ROSInfer we asked the following research questions:

RQ 1 (Recovery Rate)

Results in Section 4.2

How high is ROSInfer’s recovery rate for real-world ROS sys-
tems, i.e., what percentage of inferred architecturally-relevant
behaviors can be recovered completely?

When static analysis detects message sending behavior within
a component’s source code (e.g., a message-sending API call) it
attempts to infer a complete behavioral model of what causes the
component to send this message (e.g., to what input it reacts, at what
periodic frequency it is sent, in what state it is sent). Since static
analysis cannot always recover all parts of this behavior, resulting
models can be partial (i.e., include known unknowns ⊤). To measure
how often static analysis fails to infer parts of the resulting model
as a measure of how complete and precise inferred models are in
the practice we calculate the recovery rate for different behavior
for real-world ROS components.

RQ 2 (Recall)

Results in Section 4.3

How high is ROSInfer’s recall for real-world ROS systems, i.e.,
what percentage of architecturally-relevant component behav-
ior can ROSInfer infer correctly?

As noted earlier, our approach is based on the assumption that
developers of ROS systems commonly use the ROS API and be-
havioral patterns to implement architecturally-relevant component
behavior. So even if the static analysis could recover all elements
of detected behaviors it might miss behaviors that violate this as-
sumption. To validate this assumption and to evaluate how many
behaviors ROSInfer missed we measured the recall compared to
a ground truth. This metric measures the degree of completeness
of the set of inferred behaviors on real-world ROS systems. To
measure this, we executed ROSInfer on real ROS components with
corresponding ground truth models and compared the output for
different behavior types.

RQ 3 (Precision)

Results in Section 4.4

How high is ROSInfer’s precision for real-world ROS systems,
i.e., what percentage of inferred architecturally-relevant com-
ponent behaviors are true positives?

Since ROSInfer uses heuristics to infer architecturally-relevant
behaviors, it can incorrectly classify behaviors as periodic or reac-
tive to a component event or component input, and can include
unnecessary or incorrect state variables or state transitions. To
evaluate how many false positives are in the inferred models, i.e.,
how often ROSInfer infers behaviors that do not exist in the real
program, we measured the precision of inferred models compared
to a ground truth. This metric measures the degree of soundness of
ROSInfer’s inference heuristics on real-world ROS systems.

Overview of Evaluation Systems: For these research ques-
tions we evaluated ROSInfer on the data set presented in Timperley
et al. [76], consisting of five large real-world open source systems:

ROSInfer: Statically Inferring Behavioral Component Models for ROS-based Robotics Systems

ICSE ’24, April 14–20, 2024, Lisbon, Portugal

Table 1: Systems used for evaluation with their stars on GitHub (as
of 17th July 2023), lines of XML configuration files, lines of code in-
cluding their dependent ROS packages, and number of components.

System Stars

Lines of XML

Lines of Code Components

AutoRally
Autoware
Fetch
Husky
TurtleBot

685
7100
166
373
279

43 455
30 771
149 664
54 699
1 237 887

190 340
250 509
434 022
876 405
1 596 546

26
230
94
111
108

Autware.AI [39], AutoRally [25], Fetch [81], Husky, and Turtle-
bot [72]. To demonstrate the complexity and size of the systems
used for evaluation, statistics are shown in Table 1. Some compo-
nents are part of multiple of these systems due to component reuse,
leaving 550 unique components in total.

Ground Truth Models: Measuring recall and precision re-
quires a ground truth to compare to. Unfortunately, there is no
reliable ground truth available for the architectural behavior of
ROS components. Therefore, we needed to create ground truth
models by hand by via manual source code inspection of the five
ROS systems mentioned in Section 4.1. Due to the large size and
complexity of these systems, we could not construct models for all
550 components. Therefore, we randomly picked components for
each system (excluding components that are test or demo compo-
nents that do not contain architecturally-relevant behavior). The
first two authors of the paper (one who is closely familiar with the
implementation of ROSInfer and one who is not) evenly split the
work.

To ensure consistency we first created a protocol for manual
model inference, which is included in the replication package. The
protocol includes steps to infer behaviors, special cases to look for,
a consistent format notation, and descriptions of how to handle
exceptional cases that do not fit into the given format.

To validate the accuracy of manually inferred models, the two
authors who created the models measured their agreement of an
overlap of 21 models (14.1 % of total) that were inferred by both au-
thors, intentionally including some of the most complex models in
this overlap. They agreed completely on 86 % of these components
and partially on the remaining three components. After a discussion
of the few differences in inferred models, they identified one case
in which one author missed a type of publishing behavior, which
resulted in revising existing models to fix their representation, and
two cases of inaccurately modeled behavior that resulted in refined
ground truth models, an updated protocol for inferring models, and
updating existing models to ensure their correctness.

All 155 hand-written models are also included in the replica-
tion package and are available as a data set for other researchers
studying behavioral component models of ROS-based systems.

Threats to Validity: With respect to internal validity, the
ground-truth models were inferred by two of the paper’s authors
who have not been involved in the development of the case study
system. Since the creation of formal models for complex compo-
nent behavior is error-prone and requires deep understanding of
the domain, we cannot guarantee the correctness or completeness

of all models. We attempted to reduce this threat to validity by mea-
suring agreement between authors on model on a certain portion
of handwritten models.

With respect to external validity, the results of the evaluation
might not necessarily generalize to other ROS systems if their usage
of the ROS API or patterns of implementing architecturally rele-
vant behavior is significantly different from the five case study sys-
tems. We reduced this threat by selecting diverse case studies with
Autoware and AutoRally being mostly self-contained industrially-
developed systems and Husky, Fetch, and Turtlebot being represen-
tative for typical open-source systems that are developed without
central organization.

4.2 Measuring Recovery Rate (RQ1)
Methodology: As discussed in Section 3, ROSInfer denotes values
that cannot be statically recovered with ⊤ to indicate unknown
values. So the main metric for the recovery rate is how often ⊤ is
included in parts of the resulting model.

We ran ROSInfer on all 550 components of the five systems
presented in Section 4.1. Components that are included in multiple
systems only count once. For 16 components the static analysis
crashed due to errors in Clang, so these components are excluded
from the evaluation, leaving 534. For each type of architectural
behavior we then calculated the percentage of unknowns included
in inferred values (i.e., target frequencies for periodic behavior,
triggering events or callbacks for reactive behavior, initial values
for state variables, and new values for state transitions). These
numbers represent how well ROSInfer can infer all parameters of
a detected behavior.

Further, the trigger types recovery rate metric measures how often
ROSInfer can recover the trigger for detected publishing behavior.

Trigger Types Recovery Rate (Evaluation Metric)

The trigger types recovery rate approximates the inferred propor-
tion of the total architecturally-relevant component behavior by
measuring the percentage of message publishing calls for which
ROSInfer can infer the cause of the behavior (i.e., for which a
behavioral pattern with corresponding trigger was detected).

Note that this metric overapproximates recall in cases in which
publish calls are hidden in inaccessible source code (e.g., in DLLs)
but underapproximates recall in cases in which publish calls happen
within uncalled callbacks (e.g., XbeeCoordinator and obstacle_sim).
After the quantitative analysis, we manually inspected each case
of unknown values to conduct an in-depth qualitative analysis of
the limitations of ROSInfer using open coding and linked examples.

Results for RQ 1 (Recovery Rate)

See Table 2

In a exhaustive analysis of five large real-world ROS systems
with 534 components the overall trigger types recovery rate
is 87 %. The proportion of inferable values is 91 % for periodic
rates, 100 % for reactive triggers, 72 % for state variable initial
values, and 84 % for state changes.

Results: Detailed quantitative results are shown in Table 2. The
high trigger types recovery rate confirms the Behavioral Pattern

ICSE ’24, April 14–20, 2024, Lisbon, Portugal

Tobias Dürschmid, Christopher S. Timperley, David Garlan, and Claire Le Goues

Table 2: Results for RQ1: The trigger types recovery rate is the percentage of inferred publish calls for which ROSInfer can
infer what kind of trigger causes that behavior (periodic or reactive). For each sub-type of behavior, percentages show how
many of that type do not contain unknowns (⊤) in the inferred modes of a total of 534 components of the five large real-world
systems presented in Section 4.1. 𝑁 is the total number of behaviors of the respective type inferred by ROSInfer (all publish
calls in the case of trigger types). The All row counts components only once, even if they are included in multiple systems.

System

AutoRally
Autoware
Fetch
Husky
Turtlebot

All

Trigger Types
66.0 % (𝑁 = 47)
89.0 % (𝑁 = 465)
81.5 % (𝑁 = 27)
91.7 % (𝑁 = 48)
84.2 % (𝑁 = 38)
86.8 % (𝑁 = 638)

Periodic Rates
83.3 % (𝑁 = 18)
92.9 % (𝑁 = 99)
0.0 % (𝑁 = 1)
93.3 % (𝑁 = 15)
66.7 % (𝑁 = 12)
91.1 % (𝑁 = 158)

Reactive Triggers
100.0 % (𝑁 = 13)
100.0 % (𝑁 = 315)
100.0 % (𝑁 = 21)
100.0 % (𝑁 = 29)
100.0 % (𝑁 = 20)
100.0 % (𝑁 = 396)

Initial States
50.0 % (𝑁 = 4)
65.4 % (𝑁 = 81)
100.0 % (𝑁 = 3)
50.0 % (𝑁 = 8)
80.0 % (𝑁 = 25)
72.0 % (𝑁 = 125)

State Changes
50.0 % (𝑁 = 2)
80.9 % (𝑁 = 230)
100.0 % (𝑁 = 2)
100.0 % (𝑁 = 6)
100.0 % (𝑁 = 17)
83.8 % (𝑁 = 277)

Table 3: Recall and precision of ROSInfer based a comparison with 149 manually inferred component models. 𝑇 𝑃, 𝐹 𝑃, and 𝐹 𝑁
are the number of true positives, false positives, and false negatives compared to the ground truth models.

Ground Truth
Component Models
14
119
11
5
149

System

AutoRally
Autoware
Fetch
Turtlebot
All

Recall

Precision

Periodic Behaviors
𝐹 𝑃
𝐹 𝑁
𝑇 𝑃

Reactive Behaviors
𝐹 𝑃
𝐹 𝑁
𝑇 𝑃

State Variables
𝐹 𝑁

𝑇 𝑃

𝐹 𝑃

State Transitions
𝐹 𝑃
𝐹 𝑁
𝑇 𝑃

14
22
1
2
39

1
2
0
0
3

0
0
0
0
0

11
146
8
2
167

10
19
5
3
37

0
15
0
2
17

1
30
3
0
34

2
10
0
2
14

3
8
0
0
11

1
42
2
0
45

3
13
1
3
20

0
6
0
0
6

92.9 % (of 42)
100.0 % (of 39)

81.9 % (of 204)
90.8 % (of 184)

70.8 % (of 48)
75.6 % (of 45)

69.2 % (of 65)
88.2 % (of 51)

Usage observation, because 87 % of all message sending behavior
in the evaluated components could be automatically classified to
conform to one behavioral pattern. AutoRally has the lowest trigger
types recovery rate, because many components respond to inputs
of serial devices with project-specific API (e.g., AutoRallyChassis,
GPSHemisphere).

Cases in which ROSInfer cannot recover periodic rates include
rates that are loaded from component parameters (e.g., runStop,
fake_camera, adis16470_node, robot_pose_ekf, yocs_virtual_sensor,
lidar_fake_perception, AutoRallyChassis, watchdog_node), return
values of function calls (e.g., robot_pose_ekf), conditional be-
havior (e.g., yocs_virtual_sensor).

Cases in which ROSInfer cannot recover initial states include
primitive types with implicit initialization (e.g., decision_maker_-
node), ignored functions (e.g., tl_switch, decision_maker_node,
way_planner_core).

State transitions include unknowns if and only if the right hand-

side of assignments ot state variables cannot be constant-folded.

Reactive triggers can be recovered completely, since ROSInfer’s
current implementation does not include component events or
message inputs that can include unknown values.

4.3 Measuring Recall (RQ2)
Methodology: After creating the handwritten models as ground
truth (see Section 4.1) we executed ROSInfer on the source code
and compared the results by treating the handwritten models as

ground truth. The existence of model elements is compared auto-
matically, while expressions in conditions are compared by humans
to judge whether they are logically equivalent. After the quantita-
tive analysis, we then manually inspected each false negative to
conduct a qualitative root cause analysis of missed behaviors.

Results for RQ 2 (Recall)

See Table 3

In a ground-truth comparison with 149 components ROSInfer
has a recall of 93 % for periodic behavior, 82 % for reactive be-
havior, 71 % for state variables, and 69 % for state transitions.

Results: Detailed quantitative results are shown in Table 3.
Cases in which ROSInfer cannot detect reactive behavior in-
clude the use of virtual methods (e.g., joystick_teleop), behavior
that is triggered by other events than receiving a message in sub-
scriber callback, such as reacting to messages from external devices
received via serial ports (e.g., vg440_node), Mqtt messages (e.g.,
mqtt_receiver), or CAN-Bus (e.g., vehicle_receiver), our approach
cannot infer the trigger for this behavior.

Cases in which ROSInfer cannot recover state variables include
complicated object logic, such as whether a list or map is empty
(e.g., vscan2image). Figure 6 shows an example of this. This requires
a deeper understanding of the objects owned by the component that
are used to represent its state and is therefore a limitation of the
approach. Conditions on object fields can contain implicit depen-
dencies that cannot easily be inferred statically. For example when
a subscriber callback initializes the image stored in a state variable

ROSInfer: Statically Inferring Behavioral Component Models for ROS-based Robotics Systems

ICSE ’24, April 14–20, 2024, Lisbon, Portugal

4.5 Measuring Execution Time
When running ROSInfer on Autoware.AI on a server with 4 Intel(R)
Xeon(R) Gold 6240 CPUs (each has 18 cores at 2.6 GHz) with 256 GB
RAM, the static analysis took on average 36.5 s per component. The
fully automated analysis of the entire Autoware.AI system took 3.8 h
and much shorter for the other systems (Autorally: 10.2 min, Fetch:
29.9 min, Husky: 29.2 min, Turtlebot: 37.7 min). This indicates that
the static analysis scales to real-world systems and could integrate
well into iterative software development practices.

In practice, static model inference approaches like the presented
approach would integrate well in iterative development processes
since model inference supports automatic regeneration of models
when the sources change. Changes to the code base require regener-
ation of only the components that are affected by the change, since
ROSInfer infers which source files are required to infer each com-
ponent model. This would dramatically reduce the time to update
the system’s behavioral model after the initial execution.

The effort it took to create the 155 handwritten models of this
evaluation was approximately 120 hours of manual labor.3 In prac-
tice, the developer time saved would be lower than 120 hours, be-
cause developers potentially need to replace the known unknowns
(⊤) with correct values and cannot fully rely on the inferred mod-
els being complete. While in this paper we do not quantify the
saved effort, we present these numbers to demonstrate that the
approach can save a significant portion of time to infer models,
making model-based analysis more accessible, and economical.

5 DISCUSSION
In this section we discuss how the advantages and limitations of
the approach fit into a practical software engineering context.

5.1 Lessons Learned about ROS Components
When building the behavioral models for ROS components and
inspecting the root cause for missed behaviors we noticed:

(1) Many components are designed to process input streams and
publish processed outputs like a pipes and filters architecture.
These components are stateless and usually produce a single
output for each input that they receive.

(2) Components that maintain states are often components that
start to publish periodically after receiving a set of input
messages that are used to initialize the component, such as
the example shown in Figure 1.

(3) Only a few components implement a complex state machine.
Most explicit or implicit state variables are booleans and
only few components have more than three state variables.
(4) While the state machines that model the behavior of the com-
ponent might be less complex, developers sometimes use
more complex language features to express them than would
be necessary (see Figure 6). This makes the code more exten-
sible and easier to read by human developers, but harder to
analyze using static analysis.

3Models were inferred by authors of this paper who have advanced knowledge of
C++, a background in software architecture and formal modeling, are knowledgeable
in robotics and Autoware.AI but have not been involved in its development. Model
inference times will vary based on the expertise in the domain and experience with
the system. This number is only intended to provide an informal estimate of the effort.

Figure 6: Simplified code snippet showing an example from
waypoint_clicker in Autoware.AI for which our approach
cannot recover the state machine. The analysis would need
to model the state of a vector map containing multiple ar-
rays and identify that the assignment in the cache_point
subscriber callback affects the return value of the empty call.

whose width and height are checked to be positive numbers in
a control condition (image.width > 0 && image.height > 0) a
human developer can infer that this condition refers to checking
whether the initialization in the subscriber callback has been called
implying that the component has received the message. This de-
pendency that is implicit due to complex logic within the image
object cannot be inferred statically.

4.4 Measuring Precision (RQ3)
Methodology: For each behavior category we calculated the num-
ber of inferred behaviors that are part of the output of ROSInfer but
not part of the ground truth models. We then manually inspected
each false positive to conduct a qualitative root cause analysis of
incorrectly classified behaviors.

Results for RQ 3 (Precision)

See Table 3

In a ground-truth comparison with 149 components ROSInfer
has an precision of 100 % for periodic behavior, 91 % for reactive
behavior, 76 % for state variables, and 88 % for state transitions.

Results: Detailed quantitative results are shown in Table 3.
False positives for reactive behavior are caused by a limitation of
our current implementation that ignores state conditions of periodic
behavior in main and therefore treats it as reacting to the event
“component-started”, which can be fixed in the future.

False positives of state variables are caused by mistaking a
configuration parameter for a state variable (e.g., amcl), mis-
taking variable identity due to overloaded variable names (e.g.,
control dependencies on assignments to another state variable
false positive (e.g., pos_downloader), and control dependencies
on assignments to another state variable false positive (e.g.,
pos_downloader).

False positives of state transitions are caused by false positives

of the corresponding state variables.

lane_planner::vmap::VectorMap all_vmap; void cache_point(const vector_map::PointArray& msg){  all_vmap.points = msg.data;  update_values();}void update_values(){ if (all_vmap.points.empty() || all_vmap.lanes.empty()   || all_vmap.nodes.empty())   return; [...] lane_planner::vmap::publish_add_marker([...]);}State Change to Non-EmptyState ConditionMessage OutputICSE ’24, April 14–20, 2024, Lisbon, Portugal

Tobias Dürschmid, Christopher S. Timperley, David Garlan, and Claire Le Goues

5.2 Incomplete Models
As discussed in the approach, inferred models can be incomplete,
due to limitations discussed in the evaluation. There are two types
of incompleteness: known unknowns (i.e., the analysis can infer the
type of behavior but cannot reconstruct all its required elements so
that the resulting model contains the keyword ⊤ representing an
unknown value) and unknown unknowns (i.e., the analysis does not
detect an instance of architecturally-relevant behavior so that this
behavior is entirely missing from the resulting model). Examples
for known unknowns are frequencies of periodic publishing, topic
names, initial values or other assignments of state variables, or val-
ues that state variables are compared to in conditions. They occur
when other variables are referenced that cannot be constant-folded,
when C++ language features are used that the static analysis imple-
mentation does not support yet, when values are read from external
sources, such as run-time inputs or files, or when developers follow
the behavioral pattern but use too dynamic language features for
static analysis to be able to identify the values.

In practice, users of ROSInfer can more easily deal with known
unknowns, because ROSInfer directly points them to the place in
the code for which it was unable to reconstruct the value. Users
can then figure out the values and replace the known unknowns
in the model with accurate values. Since they only need to fill in
the blanks for some values, this task is much easier and less time-
consuming than building the entire model from scratch. In some
cases, known unknonws can be reduced with more engineering
effort to improve the static analysis, but cannot be fully eliminated.
Having incomplete models would still be preferable to having no
models, because even incomplete models allow finding behavioral
architecture composition bugs that would not have been found
otherwise.

Unknown unknowns are more limiting in practice, since it is
much harder for users to identify that information is missing from
the generated models. Unknown unknowns can be reduced by
extending the list of behavioral patterns to look for or by adding
the APIs of commonly used libraries, but cannot be fully eliminated.

5.3 Real-World Bugs Found
To demonstrate the real-world effectiveness of ROSInfer, we iden-
tified documented behavioral architecture composition bugs within
the data set presented in Timperley et al. [76], the only open set of
architecture composition bugs in ROS currently known to us. Three
of these bugs (autoware-02, autoware-03, autoware-10) can be clas-
sified as behavioral architecture composition bugs. Autoware-02
is shown in Figure 1. The other two also result from required in-
puts for important component behavior not being connected to
publishers. We ran ROSInfer on these systems, generated Plus-
Cal/TLA+ specifications and checked that expected outputs happen
eventually. ROSInfer found all of these bugs based on a given list
of components in the system configuration, a desired output to
check for, and configuration parameter assignments. The resulting
models are available in the supplemental material.

5.4 Coding Style Guidelines
Unlike many open-source ROS systems, most industrially devel-
oped projects follow coding style guidelines that narrow down the

expected kinds of behaviors by telling developers to implement
certain types of code in a certain way. We expect the recall of our
approach to benefit from this, because fewer cases of unnecessar-
ily complex versions of simpler code would exist. This effect can
become even stronger if coding styles related to specifying archi-
tecturally relevant behavior are established, as almost all cases in
which our approach cannot correctly infer architecturally-relevant
behavior, the corresponding code could be refactored towards more
analyzable code. For example, coding style guidelines, such as “com-
ponent states should be explicitly modeled as variables in the code”
to avoid the limitation described in Figure 6 by replacing empty()
calls with a state variable, “state variables should be initialized ex-
plicitly” to avoid unknown or ambiguous initial states, or “ROS
connectors should be used where possible” to avoid over-use of
project-specific APIs. Similarly to how testability became a goal
of software design to reduce the effort of ensuring correctness via
testing, analyzability of code could become a future design goal of
ROS code to supporting the automatic inference of rich behavioral
models for automated formal analysis.

6 RELATED WORK
To demonstrate the novelty of this work, we discuss other analy-
ses that have been performed on robotics systems, approaches to
recover static architectures, and dynamic analyses of behavioral
models and explain how our work differs from them.

6.1 Analysis of Robot Systems
Static analysis and formal model-based analysis have been used to
automatically find bugs in robot systems before [4, 32, 51, 63]. For
example, the systems Phriky [62], Phys [38], and Physframe [37]
use type checking to find inconsistencies in assignments based on
physical units or 3D transformations in ROS code.

Furthermore, Swarmbug [34] finds configuration bugs in robot
systems that result from misconfigured algorithmic parameters,
causing the system to behave unexpectedly.

These approaches focus on the analysis of bugs that result from
coding errors that are localized in a few places of the system. In
contrast, our work aims to reconstruct models that can be used to
identify incorrect composition or connection of components and
therefore focus on architectural bugs.

6.2 Inference of Structural Architectures
Most approaches for static recovery of software architectures recon-
struct structural views of software modules from the perspective
of a developer [3, 15, 18, 21, 22, 24, 28, 53, 55, 56, 64, 71, 73]. Since
they show the code before compiling it, the module view does not
show the relationships of components during run time [16] and
therefore cannot find behavioral bugs.

DeSARM [65], SAMEtech [33] are dynamic approaches to recon-
struct component-port-connector (CPC) models. ROSDiscover [76],
HAROS [67, 69], and the tool by Witte et al. [82] can statically
reconstruct CPC models for robotics systems. CPC models describe
the types of inputs that a component receives, the types of outputs
it produces, and to what other components their input and out-
put ports are connected to. However, CPC models do not contain
information about how a component reacts to inputs (e.g., what

ROSInfer: Statically Inferring Behavioral Component Models for ROS-based Robotics Systems

ICSE ’24, April 14–20, 2024, Lisbon, Portugal

kind of output it produces in response to an input), whether an
output port is triggered sporadically or periodically, and whether
the component’s behavior is dependent on states. Therefore, CPC
models cannot be used to analyze the data flow within a system.

While CPC models identify the communication channels that
components use to interact with the rest of the system they do not
describe the conditions under which communications actually occur.
They do not contain information about how a component reacts to
inputs (e.g., what kind of output it produces in response to an input),
whether an output port is triggered sporadically or periodically,
and whether the component’s behavior is dependent on states. In
contrast, ROSInfer builds upon ROSDiscover’s implementation and
output to produce behavioral component models that describe how
a node reacts to incoming messages (e.g., publishing a message to
a different topic; switching into a different state) and timing-based
triggers (e.g., publishing a status message every 50 ms). Therefore,
ROSInfer allows to find behavioral architectural composition bugs,
such as the ones described in Section 5.3 that ROSInfer found.

6.3 Dynamic Inference of Behaviors
Behavioral models of components can be inferred using dynamic
analysis by observing the component behavior of representative
execution traces. For example, Kieker [29, 77], DiscoTect [70] and
Perfume [61] construct state machines from event traces obtained
by run time monitoring. Similar approaches also use method invari-
ants [46], LTL property templates [50] to increase the effectiveness.
Domain-specific approaches have been proposed for for CORBA
systems [58] or telecommunication systems [57]. The main limita-
tion of dynamic approaches that are based on mere observation is
that they can only measure correlations between inputs and states
and outputs and cannot make claims about causal relationships.
Additionally, approaches relying on dynamic execution might miss
cases in rarely executed software. In contrast to this, our approach
analyzes the control and data flow of the source code and therefore
has the capabilities to differentiate concurrent behavior that just
coincidentally happens after an input or state change from behavior
that is caused by an event. Furthermore, dynamic approaches re-
quire either an accurate simulator or real robot hardware to produce
reliable results and need to execute a large number of representative
traces through the system in real time, which can increase the time
and cost of the model creation for computation-intense systems
compared to static analysis approaches, such as ROSInfer.

7 CONCLUSIONS
In this paper we have shown that looking for specific API calls of the
ROS framework and commonly used behavioral implementation
patterns enable the effective static inference of models that capture
architecturally-relevant component behavior with high precision
and recall. This work is a contribution towards making well-proven
and powerful but infrequently used methods of model-based analy-
sis more accessible and economical in practice, potentially leading
to robotics systems becoming safer and more robust. Due to its
potential to integrate well into practical software development
environments with continuous integration and potentially higher
accuracy with established coding style guidelines, we believe that
API-call-guided static inference can have a significant impact on

practice. While this paper focused only on ROS-based systems, we
believe that API-call-based inference of component behavior is
a promising approach that could generalize to other frameworks
within the domain of cyber-physical systems and inspire future
work that applies this approach to other ecosystems.

8 FUTURE WORK
We envision this contribution to enable the following future work:
Automatic Generation of Documentation: Automated in-
ference of behavior models can support the generation of docu-
mentation for components, especially for reusable components. In
cases in which components need to receive a set of initialization
inputs to function properly (such as the example from Figure 1), in-
ference of architecturally-relevant component models can be used
to demonstrate which inputs are required for which output.

Automated Program Repair: Since models that were inferred
from source code have the advantage of retaining a mapping be-
tween source code locations and model elements a repair patch for
the model could be translated back to code. This opens motivates
future work on model-repair translations back to code.

Repository Mining: Automatic inference of component behav-
ioral models enables large-scale empirical research on the develop-
ment and evolution of component behavior and inter-component
communication patterns in complex robotics systems.

Test Generation:

Information about what input messages
change the component to a state in which it executes different
behavior can be helpful to systematically generate test cases to
cover a larger portion of the component’s behavior.

Combination of Static and Dynamic Analysis: The lim-
itations shown in the results of RQ1 can be overcome with the
use of dynamic analysis. Furthermore, static analysis cannot infer
execution times of tasks, producing models that cannot be used
for most kinds of performance analysis, bottleneck analysis, or
analysis of race condition. Results from from static analysis can
inform systematic test generation and instrumentation of code to
specifically obtain information that is missing in statically inferred
models to increase recovery rate and recall. Furthermore, testing
for the existence of inferred behavior can reduce false positives.

Generalization to Other Frameworks: The approach of API-
call-based static inference of component behavior is not inherently
specific to the ROS framework. Other component frameworks, such
as NASA’s FPrime framework [8], that provide APIs for component
interaction mechanisms could implement this approach as well.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The authors would also like to thank the anonymous referees for
their valuable comments and helpful suggestions. This work has
been funded in part by the NSF under award numbers CCF-1750116
and CNS-2148301.

ICSE ’24, April 14–20, 2024, Lisbon, Portugal

Tobias Dürschmid, Christopher S. Timperley, David Garlan, and Claire Le Goues

REFERENCES
[1]

Afsoon Afzal, Claire Le Goues, Michael Hilton, and Christopher S. Timperley.
2020. A Study on Challenges of Testing Robotic Systems. In International
Conference on Software Testing, Validation and Verification (ICST ’20), 96–107.
doi: 10.1109/ICST46399.2020.00020.
Aakash Ahmad and Muhammad Ali Babar. 2016. Software Architectures for
Robotic Systems: A Systematic Mapping Study. Journal of Systems and Software,
122, (December 2016), 16–39. doi: 10.1016/j.jss.2016.08.039.
Periklis Andritsos, Panayiotis Tsaparas, Renée J. Miller, and Kenneth C. Sevcik.
2004. LIMBO: Scalable Clustering of Categorical Data. In International Con-
ference on Extending Database Technology (EDBT ’04) - Advances in Database
Technology. Springer, 123–146. doi: 10.1007/978-3-540-24741-8_9.

[2]

[3]

[6]

[5]

[4] Hugo Araujo, Mohammad Reza Mousavi, and Mahsa Varshosaz. 2023. Testing,
Validation, and Verification of Robotic and Autonomous Systems: A Systematic
Review. ACM Trans. Softw. Eng. Methodol., 32, 2, Article 51, (March 2023), 61
pages. doi: 10.1145/3542945.
Janis Arents, Valters Abolins, Janis Judvaitis, Oskars Vismanis, Aly Oraby, and
Kaspars Ozols. 2021. Human-Robot Collaboration Trends and Safety Aspects:
A Systematic Review. Journal of Sensor and Actuator Networks, 10, 3, (July 2021).
doi: 10.3390/jsan10030048.
Steffen Becker, Lars Grunske, Raffaela Mirandola, and Sven Overhage. 2006.
Performance Prediction of Component-Based Systems. In Architecting Systems
with Trustworthy Components. Springer, 169–192. doi: 10.1007/11786160_10.
Steffen Becker, Heiko Koziolek, and Ralf Reussner. 2009. The Palladio com-
ponent model for model-driven performance prediction. Journal of Systems
and Software, 82, 1, 3–22. Special Issue: Software Performance - Modeling and
Analysis. doi: 10.1016/j.jss.2008.03.066.
Robert Bocchino, Timothy Canham, Garth Watney, Leonard Reder, and Jeffrey
Levison. 2018. F Prime: An Open-Source Framework for Small-Scale Flight
Software Systems. In Small Satellite Conference number Advanced Technologies
II, 328. https://digitalcommons.usu.edu/smallsat/2018/all2018/328/.

[7]

[8]

[10]

[11]

[12]

[13]

[9] Marco Bozzano, Alessandro Cimatti, Joost-Pieter Katoen, Viet Yen Nguyen,
Thomas Noll, and Marco Roveri. 2011. Safety, dependability and performance
analysis of extended aadl models. The Computer Journal, 54, 5, (May 2011),
754–775. doi: 10.1093/comjnl/bxq024.
Alex Brooks, Tobias Kaupp, Alexei Makarenko, Stefan Williams, and Andres
Orebäck. 2005. Towards component-based robotics. In International Conference
on Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS ’05). IEEE, 163–168. doi: 10.1109/IROS.
2005.1545523.
Franz Brosch, Heiki Koziolek, Barbora Buhnova, and Ralf Reussner. 2012.
Architecture-Based Reliability Prediction with the Palladio Component Model.
IEEE Transactions on Software Engineering (TSE), 38, 6, (November 2012), 1319–
1339. doi: 10.1109/TSE.2011.94.
Davide Brugali. 2015. Model-Driven Software Engineering in Robotics. IEEE
Robotics & Automation Magazine, 22, 3, 155–166. doi: 10 . 1109 / MRA . 2015 .
2452201.
Davide Brugali, Alex Brooks, Anthony Cowley, Carle Côté, Antonio C. Domínguez-
Brito, Dominic Létourneau, Françis Michaud, and Christian Schlegel. 2007.
Trends in Component-Based Robotics. In Software Engineering for Experimen-
tal Robotics. Springer, 135–142. doi: 10.1007/978-3-540-68951-5_8.
Paulo Canelas, Miguel Tavares, Ricardo Cordeiro, Alcides Fonseca, and Christo-
pher S. Timperley. 2022. An Experience Report on Challenges in Learning
the Robot Operating System. In International Workshop on Robotics Software
Engineering (RoSE ’22), 33–38. doi: 10.1145/3526071.3527521.
Landry Chouambe, Benjamin Klatt, and Klaus Krogmann. 2008. Reverse Engi-
neering Software-Models of Component-Based Systems. In European Confer-
ence on Software Maintenance and Reengineering (CSMR ’08). IEEE, 93–102. doi:
10.1109/CSMR.2008.4493304.
Paul Clements, Felix Bachmann, Len Bass, David Garlan, James Ivers, Judith
Stafford, Reed Little, and Robert Nord. 2003. Documenting Software Architec-
tures: Views and Beyond. Addison-Wesley Professional.
Zack Coker, David Gray Widder, Claire Le Goues, Christopher Bogart, and
Joshua Sunshine. 2019. A Qualitative Study on Framework Debugging. In
International Conference on Software Maintenance and Evolution (ICSME ’19),
568–579. doi: 10.1109/ICSME.2019.00091.
Anna Corazza, Sergio Di Martino, Valerio Maggio, and Giuseppe Scanniello.
2011. Investigating the use of lexical information for software system clustering.
In European Conference on Software Maintenance and Reengineering (CSMR ’11).
IEEE, 35–44. doi: 10.1109/CSMR.2011.8.

[16]

[17]

[14]

[18]

[15]

[19] Martin Dahl, Kristofer Bengtsson, Martin Fabian, and Petter Falkman. 2017.
Automatic Modeling and Simulation of Robot Program Behavior in Integrated
Virtual Preparation and Commissioning. Procedia Manufacturing, 11, 284–291.
International Conference on Flexible Automation and Intelligent Manufactur-
ing (FAIM ’17). doi: 10.1016/j.promfg.2017.07.107.
Edson de Araújo Silva, Eduardo Valentin, Jose Reginaldo Hughes Carvalho,
and Raimundo da Silva Barreto. 2021. A survey of Model Driven Engineering

[20]

[21]

[22]

[23]

[24]

[25]

[26]

[27]

[28]

in robotics. Journal of Computer Languages, 62, 101021. doi: 10.1016/j.cola.2020.
101021.
D. Doval, S. Mancoridis, and B.S. Mitchell. 1999. Automatic clustering of soft-
ware systems using a genetic algorithm. In International Workshop on Software
Technology and Engineering Practice (STEP ’99). IEEE, 73–81. doi: 10.1109/STEP.
1999.798481.
Joshua Garcia, Daniel Popescu, Chris Mattmann, Nenad Medvidovic, and Yuan-
fang Cai. 2011. Enhancing architectural recovery using concerns. In Interna-
tional Conference on Automated Software Engineering (ASE ’11). IEEE, 552–555.
doi: 10.1109/ASE.2011.6100123.
Xiaocheng Ge, Richard F. Paige, and John A. McDermid. 2010. Analysing System
Failure Behaviours with PRISM. In International Conference on Secure Software
Integration and Reliability Improvement Companion (SSIRI ’10), 130–136. doi:
10.1109/SSIRI-C.2010.32.
Negar Ghorbani, Joshua Garcia, and Sam Malek. 2019. Detection and repair
of architectural inconsistencies in java. In 2019 IEEE/ACM 41st International
Conference on Software Engineering (ICSE), 560–571. doi: 10.1109/ICSE.2019.
00067.
Brian Goldfain, Paul Drews, Changxi You, Matthew Barulic, Orlin Velev, Pana-
giotis Tsiotras, and James M Rehg. 2019. AutoRally: An Open Platform for
Aggressive Autonomous Driving. IEEE Control Systems Magazine, 39, 1, 26–55.
doi: 10.1109/MCS.2018.2876958.
Adriano Gomes, Alexandre Mota, Augusto Sampaio, Felipe Ferri, and Julio
Buzzi. 2010. Systematic model-based safety assessment via probabilistic model
checking. In Leveraging Applications of Formal Methods, Verification, and Vali-
dation. Springer, 625–639.
Raju Halder, José Proença, Nuno Macedo, and André Santos. 2017. Formal
Verification of ROS-Based Robotic Applications Using Timed-Automata. (2017).
doi: 10.1109/FormaliSE.2017.9.
David R. Harris, Howard B. Reubenstein, and Alexander S. Yeh. 1995. Reverse
Engineering to the Architectural Level. In International Conference on Software
Engineering (ICSE ’95). IEEE, 186–186. doi: 10.1145/225014.225032.

[33]

[34]

[32]

[31]

[30]

[29] Wilhelm Hasselbring and André van Hoorn. 2020. Kieker: A monitoring frame-
work for software engineering research. Software Impacts, 5, 100019. doi: https:
//doi.org/10.1016/j.simpa.2020.100019.
Abdelfetah Hentout, Mustapha Aouache, Abderraouf Maoudj, and Isma Akli.
2019. Human-robot interaction in industrial collaborative robotics: a literature
review of the decade 2008–2017. Advanced Robotics, 33, 15-16, 764–799. doi:
10.1080/01691864.2019.1636714.
Casidhe Hutchison, Milda Zizyte, Patrick E. Lanigan, David Guttendorf, Michael
Wagner, Claire Le Goues, and Philip Koopman. 2018. Robustness Testing of Au-
tonomy Software. In International Conference on Software Engineering: Software
Engineering in Practice (ICSE-SEIP ’18). ACM, 276–285. doi: 10.1145/3183519.
3183534.
Felix Ingrand. 2019. Recent Trends in Formal Validation and Verification of
Autonomous Robots Software. In International Conference on Robotic Computing
(IRC), 321–328. doi: 10.1109/IRC.2019.00059.
Tauseef Israr, Murray Woodside, and Greg Franks. 2007. Interaction tree algo-
rithms to extract effective architecture and layered performance models from
traces. Journal of Systems and Software, 80, 4, 474–492. Software Performance.
doi: 10.1016/j.jss.2006.07.019.
Chijung Jung, Ali Ahad, Jinho Jung, Sebastian Elbaum, and Yonghwi Kwon.
2021. Swarmbug: Debugging Configuration Bugs in Swarm Robotics. In Joint
Meeting on European Software Engineering Conference and Symposium on the
Foundations of Software Engineering (ESEC/FSE ’21). ACM, 868–880. doi: 10.
1145/3468264.3468601.
Jin Hwa Jung and Dong-Geon Lim. 2020. Industrial robots, employment growth,
and labor cost: a simultaneous equation analysis. Technological Forecasting and
Social Change, 159, 120202. doi: 10.1016/j.techfore.2020.120202.

[36] Min Yang Jung, Anton Deguet, and Peter Kazanzides. 2010. A component-
based architecture for flexible integration of robotic systems. In International
Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS ’10, 6107–6112. doi: 10.1109/
IROS.2010.5652394.
Sayali Kate, Michael Chinn, Hongjun Choi, Xiangyu Zhang, and Sebastian
Elbaum. 2021. PHYSFRAME: Type Checking Physical Frames of Reference for
Robotic Systems. In Joint Meeting on European Software Engineering Conference
and Symposium on the Foundations of Software Engineering (ESEC/FSE ’21).
ACM, 45–56. doi: 10.1145/3468264.3468608.
Sayali Kate, John-Paul Ore, Xiangyu Zhang, Sebastian Elbaum, and Zhaogui
Xu. 2018. Phys: Probabilistic Physical Unit Assignment and Inconsistency
Detection. In Joint Meeting on European Software Engineering Conference and
Symposium on the Foundations of Software Engineering (ESEC/FSE ’18). ACM,
563–573. doi: 10.1145/3236024.3236035.
Shinpei Kato, Eijiro Takeuchi, Yoshio Ishiguro, Yoshiki Ninomiya, Kazuya
Takeda, and Tsuyoshi Hamada. 2015. An Open Approach to Autonomous
Vehicles. IEEE Micro, 35, 6, 60–68. doi: 10.1109/MM.2015.133.

[40] Mourad Kmimech, Mohamed Tahar Bhiri, and Phillipe Aniorte. 2009. Checking
Component Assembly in Acme: An Approach Applied on UML 2.0 Components

[35]

[39]

[38]

[37]

ROSInfer: Statically Inferring Behavioral Component Models for ROS-based Robotics Systems

ICSE ’24, April 14–20, 2024, Lisbon, Portugal

[41]

[42]

[43]

Model. In International Conference on Software Engineering Advances (ICSEA
’09), 494–499. doi: 10.1109/ICSEA.2009.78.
Sophia Kolak, Afsoon Afzal, Claire Le Goues, Michael Hilton, and Christopher S
Timperley. 2020. It Takes a Village to Build a Robot: An Empirical Study of
The ROS Ecosystem. In International Conference on Software Maintenance and
Evolution (ICSME ’20). IEEE, 430–440. doi: 10.1109/ICSME46990.2020.00048.
Philip Koopman and Michael Wagner. 2016. Challenges in autonomous vehicle
testing and validation. SAE International Journal of Transportation Safety, 4, 1,
15–24. http://www.jstor.org/stable/26167741.
Sitar Kortik and Tejas Kumar Shastha. 2021. Formal verification of ros based
systems using a linear logic theorem prover. In International Conference on
Robotics and Automation (ICRA), 9368–9374. doi: 10.1109/ICRA48506.2021.
9561191.

[52]

[53]

[50]

[49]

[48]

[46]

[45]

[44] Heiko Koziolek. 2010. Performance evaluation of component-based software
systems: A survey. Performance Evaluation, 67, 8, 634–658. Special Issue on
Software and Performance. doi: 10.1016/j.peva.2009.07.007.
James Kramer and Matthias Scheutz. 2007. Development environments for
autonomous mobile robots: A survey. Autonomous Robots, 22, 2, 101–132. doi:
10.1007/s10514-006-9013-8.
Ivo Krka, Yuriy Brun, and Nenad Medvidovic. 2014. Automatic Mining of
Specifications from Invocation Traces and Method Invariants. In Proceedings
of the 22nd ACM SIGSOFT International Symposium on Foundations of Software
Engineering (FSE 2014). ACM, 178–189. doi: 10.1145/2635868.2635890.
[47] Marta Kwiatkowska, Gethin Norman, and David Parker. 2009. PRISM: Proba-
bilistic Model Checking for Performance and Reliability Analysis. SIGMETRICS
Perform. Eval. Rev., 36, 4, (March 2009), 40–45. doi: 10.1145/1530873.1530882.
Leslie Lamport. 2009. The PlusCal Algorithm Language. In Theoretical Aspects
of Computing. Springer, 36–60. doi: 10.1007/978-3-642-03466-4_2.
Larry A. Layne. 2023. Robot-related fatalities at work in the United States,
1992–2017. American Journal of Industrial Medicine, 66, 6, 454–461. doi: https:
//doi.org/10.1002/ajim.23470.
Caroline Lemieux, Dennis Park, and Ivan Beschastnikh. 2015. General LTL
Specification Mining (T). In International Conference on Automated Software
Engineering (ASE ’15), 81–92. doi: 10.1109/ASE.2015.71.

[51] Matt Luckcuck, Marie Farrell, Louise A. Dennis, Clare Dixon, and Michael
Fisher. 2019. Formal Specification and Verification of Autonomous Robotic
Systems: A Survey. ACM Comput. Surv., 52, 5, Article 100, (September 2019), 41
pages. doi: 10.1145/3342355.
Steven Macenski, Tully Foote, Brian Gerkey, Chris Lalancette, and William
Woodall. 2022. Robot Operating System 2: Design, Architecture, and Uses In
The Wild. Science Robotics, 7, 66, eabm6074. doi: 10.1126/scirobotics.abm6074.
Spiros Mancoridis, Brian S. Mitchell, Yih-Farn R. Chen, and Emden R. Gansner.
1999. Bunch: a clustering tool for the recovery and maintenance of software
system structures. In International Conference on Software Maintenance (ICSM
’99). IEEE, 50–59. doi: 10.1109/ICSM.1999.792498.
Xinjun Mao, Hao Huang, and Shuo Wang. 2020. Software Engineering for Au-
tonomous Robot: Challenges, Progresses and Opportunities. In Asia-Pacific Soft-
ware Engineering Conference (APSEC ’20), 100–108. doi: 10.1109/APSEC51365.
2020.00018.
Onaiza Maqbool and Haroon Babri. 2007. Hierarchical Clustering for Software
Architecture Recovery. Transactions on Software Engineering (TSE), 33, 11, 759–
780. doi: 10.1109/TSE.2007.70732.
Onaiza Maqbool and Haroon Babri. 2004. The weighted combined algorithm: a
linkage algorithm for software clustering. In European Conference on Software
Maintenance and Reengineering (CSMR ’04). IEEE, 15–24. doi: 10.1109/CSMR.
2004.1281402.
A. Marburger and D. Herzberg. 2001. E-CARES research project: understand-
ing complex legacy telecommunication systems. In European Conference on
Software Maintenance and Reengineerin (CSMR ’01). IEEE, 139–147. doi: 10.
1109/CSMR.2001.914978.
Johan Moe and David A. Carr. 2001. Understanding distributed systems via
execution trace data. In International Workshop on Program Comprehension
(IWPC ’01). IEEE, 60–67. doi: 10.1109/WPC.2001.921714.
Chris Newcombe. 2014. Why Amazon Chose TLA +. In Abstract State Machines,
Alloy, B, TLA, VDM, and Z. Springer, 25–39. doi: 10.1007/978-3-662-43652-3_3.
Chris Newcombe, Tim Rath, Fan Zhang, Bogdan Munteanu, Marc Brooker, and
Michael Deardeuff. 2015. How Amazon Web Services Uses Formal Methods.
Commun. ACM, 58, 4, (March 2015), 66–73. doi: 10.1145/2699417.
Tony Ohmann, Michael Herzberg, Sebastian Fiss, Armand Halbert, Marc Pal-
yart, Ivan Beschastnikh, and Yuriy Brun. 2014. Behavioral Resource-Aware
Model Inference. In International Conference on Automated Software Engineering
(ASE ’14). ACM, 19–30. doi: 10.1145/2642937.2642988.
John-Paul Ore, Carrick Detweiler, and Sebastian Elbaum. 2017. Lightweight
Detection of Physical Unit Inconsistencies without Program Annotations. In
SIGSOFT International Symposium on Software Testing and Analysis (ISSTA ’17).
ACM, 341–351. doi: 10.1145/3092703.3092722.
Samuel Parra, Sven Schneider, and Nico Hochgeschwender. 2021. Specifying
QoS Requirements and Capabilities for Component-Based Robot Software. In

[57]

[63]

[54]

[55]

[56]

[58]

[59]

[60]

[61]

[62]

[64]

[65]

2021 IEEE/ACM 3rd International Workshop on Robotics Software Engineering
(RoSE’21), 29–36. doi: 10.1109/RoSE52553.2021.00012.
Sukesh Patel, William Chu, and Rich Baxter. 1992. A Measure for Composite
Module Cohesion. In International Conference on Software Engineering (ICSE
’92). ACM, 38–48. doi: 10.1145/143062.143086.
Jason Porter, Daniel A. Menascé, and Hassan Gomaa. 2021. A decentralized
approach for discovering runtime software architectural models of distributed
software systems. Information and Software Technology, 131, 106476. doi: 0.
1016/j.infsof.2020.106476.

[72]

[71]

[70]

[67]

[68]

[69]

[66] Morgan Quigley. 2009. ROS: an open-source Robot Operating System. In In-
ternational Conference on Robotics and Automation Workshop on Open Source
Software. http://lars.mec.ua.pt/public/LAR%20Projects/BinPicking/2016_
RodrigoSalgueiro/LIB/ROS/icraoss09-ROS.pdf.
André Santos, Alcino Cunha, and Nuno Macedo. 2019. Static-Time Extraction
and Analysis of the ROS Computation Graph. In International Conference on
Robotic Computing (IRC ’19). IEEE, 62–69. doi: 10.1109/IRC.2019.00018.
André Santos, Alcino Cunha, Nuno Macedo, Rafael Arrais, and Filipe Neves
dos Santos. 2017. Mining the usage patterns of ROS primitives. In International
Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS ’17). IEEE, 3855–3860. doi:
10.1109/IROS.2017.8206237.
André Santos, Alcino Cunha, Nuno Macedo, and Cláudio Lourenço. 2016. A
framework for quality assessment of ros repositories. In International Con-
ference on Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS ’16). IEEE, 4491–4496. doi:
10.1109/IROS.2016.7759661.
Bradley Schmerl, Jonathan Aldrich, David Garlan, Rick Kazman, and Hong
Yan. 2006. Discovering Architectures from Running Systems. Transactions on
Software Engineering (TSE), 32, 7, (July 2006). doi: 10.1109/TSE.2006.66.
Robert W. Schwanke. 1991. An Intelligent Tool for Re-Engineering Software
Modularity. In International Conference on Software Engineering (ICSE ’91). IEEE,
83–92. doi: 10.1109/ICSE.1991.130626.
Diksha Singh, Esha Trivedi, Yukti Sharma, and Vandana Niranjan. 2018. Turtle-
Bot: Design and Hardware Component Selection. In International Conference
on Computing, Power and Communication Technologies (GUCON ’18), 805–809.
doi: 10.1109/GUCON.2018.8675050.
Zipani Tom Sinkala and Sebastian Herold. 2021. InMap: Automated Interactive
Code-to-Architecture Mapping Recommendations. In International Conference
on Software Architecture (ICSA ’21). IEEE, 173–183. doi: 10.1109/ICSA51549.
2021.00024.
Bridget Spitznagel and David Garlan. 1998. Architecture-Based Performance
Analysis. In Conference on Software Engineering and Knowledge Engineering
(SEKE ’98). (June 1998). http://www.cs.cmu.edu/afs/cs/project/able/ftp/
perform-seke98/perform-seke98.pdf.
Christopher Timperley and A Wąsowski. 2019. 188 ROS bugs later: Where do
we go from here? ROSCON’19. doi: 10.36288/ROSCon2019-900898.
Christopher S. Timperley, Dürschmid, Tobias, Bradley Schmerl, David Garlan,
and Claire Le Goues. 2022. ROSDiscover: Statically Detecting Run-Time Archi-
tecture Misconfigurations in Robotics Systems. In IEEE International Conference
on Software Architecture (ICSA ’22). IEEE, 112–123. doi: 10.1109/ICSA53651.
2022.00019.
André van Hoorn, Jan Waller, and Wilhelm Hasselbring. 2012. Kieker: A Frame-
work for Application Performance Monitoring and Dynamic Software Analysis.
In International Conference on Performance Engineering (CPE ’12) (ICPE ’12).
ACM, 247–248. doi: 10.1145/2188286.2188326.

[73]

[74]

[75]

[76]

[77]

[79]

[78] Milos Vasic and Aude Billard. 2013. Safety Issues in Human-Robot Interactions.
In International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA ’13). IEEE, 197–
204. doi: 10.1109/ICRA.2013.6630576.
Valeria Villani, Fabio Pini, Francesco Leali, and Cristian Secchi. 2018. Survey on
Human-Robot Collaboration in Industrial Settings: Safety, Intuitive Interfaces
and Applications. Mechatronics, 55, 248–266. doi: 10.1016/j.mechatronics.2018.
02.009.

[80] Markus Weißmann, Stefan Bedenk, Christian Buckl, and Alois Knoll. 2011.
Model Checking Industrial Robot Systems. In Model Checking Software. Springer,
161–176. doi: 10.1007/978-3-642-22306-8_11.

[82]

[81] Melonee Wise, Michael Ferguson, Derek King, Eric Diehr, and David Dymesich.
2016. Fetch & Freight: Standard Platforms for Service Robot Applications. In
Workshop on autonomous mobile service robots. http : / / docs . fetch3staging .
wpengine.com/FetchAndFreight2016.pdf.
Thomas Witte and Matthias Tichy. 2018. Checking Consistency of Robot Soft-
ware Architectures in ROS. In International Workshop on Robotics Software En-
gineering (RoSE ’18). IEEE, 1–8. https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/8445812.
Kangfeng Ye, Ana Cavalcanti, Simon Foster, Alvaro Miyazawa, and Jim Wood-
cock. 2022. Probabilistic modelling and verification using RoboChart and PRISM.
Software and Systems Modeling, 21, 2, (April 2022), 667–716. doi: 10.1007/s10270-
021-00916-8.

[83]

